---
titel: "B1.09 SCRIPT"
quelle: "Studium Andrin (HSLU/ETH)"
datei: "B1.09 SCRIPT.pdf"
seiten: 28
ocr-seiten: 0
tags: [bauwissen, vorlesung]
---

# B1.09 SCRIPT

## S. 2

1
1.09
Civilized Wilderness and 
City Beautiful: 
The Park Movement of Olmsted 
and The Urban Plans of Burnham
In the late 19th century industrial development was at 
full pace in North America. The economy transitioned 
from manual labor and draft animals toward machinebased manufacturing, exemplified by the mechanization of the textile industry, new iron-making techniques, 
and the use of refined coal for energy. This was paired 
with technological development, including the invention of the elevator, the bridge, the radiator, electric 
light bulb, the telephone, sewerage, central power, 
and new steel construction methods.
At the end of the 19th century the United States also 
saw an extreme rise in population (1790: 4 million/ 1920: 
106 million) and a surge in urbanization (1790: 5 % lived in cities/ 1920: more than 50%). The physical and 
institutional infrastructure of cities was not prepared for 
this unprecedented urban growth. The result were lamentable living conditions, which included horrible air 
quality as a result of coal-fired factories, contaminated 
drinking water, as well as pestilence and disease from 
deficient sewerage and solid waste. Cities were often 
characterized by inefficient movement of goods and 
services, tenement housing with little fresh air or light, 
hazardous and unethical working conditions and extreme income disparities.
Social movements and reforms emerged from these 
conditions. Already in the last decades of the 19th century many cities would develop strategies for the amelioration of health and well-being of their inhabitants 
through improvements in the physical fabric of the city. 
It would take until 1908, however, before the Pittsburgh 
Survey offered the first time a detailed analysis of social welfare, addressing issues such as public health, 
labor conditions and housing. It was rapidly followed 
by the Plan of Chicago, which provided in 1909 the first 
comprehensive design for a clean, hospitable urban 
antidote to industrial squalor. 
The park movement should be situated within these 
wider attempts for physical and social reform. It was 
a reaction to the prevailing miasma theory of disease and bad hygienic conditions in cities. It promoted 
the introduction of public parks and its ideology was 
predicated on the importance of open, public green 
space to the health and vitality of urban populations. 
This was also the viewpoint of Frederick Law Olmsted, 
who claimed that: ‘‘a park exercises a very different 
and much greater influence upon the progress of a city 
in its general structure than any other ordinary public 
work, and that after the design for a park has been fully 
digested, a long series of years must elapse before 
the ends of the design will begin to be fully realized.’’ 
Olmsted would illustrate his vision in the designs for 
Central Park in New York and the so-called Emerald 
Necklace in Boston.
Part of the progressive social reform in North America 
was also the City Beautiful Movement. It was initiated 
under the leadership of thinkers and architects of the 
upper-middle class –such as Daniel Burnham— concerned with the social deprivation and potential social 
unrest of those living in poor and unhealthy conditions 
in all major cities, namely immigrants, in a period during 
which the total population grew drastically. At the same 
time, the City Beautiful Movement aimed to achieve a 
cultural parity with the cities of Europe. Inspired by the 
European Beaux-Arts, it postulated the necessity of order, dignity and harmony in architecture and proposed 
monumental and classical forms to revitalize the city 
centre and increase property value. Its basic premise 
was that through reform of the urban landscape, together with policies in other sectors, it would be possible 
to control the problems caused by the growing urban 
population.

## S. 3

2
1.09
1. Development of rail roads and canals, 1860.
2. Industrial development, 1890.
3. Population and urbanization, 1900.
Civilized Wilderness: 
The Politics and Parks of Olmsted
3
2
1
critisized fast growing citys => problem of diseases
1908 Pittsburg Survey => ﬁrst analysis of issues in public healt, labor conditions, gender and housing
1909 Plan of Chicago => ﬁrst plan and vision of….

## S. 4

3
1.09
4. New York, Greensward Study for 
Central Park by Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, 1858. Plan with 
indication of the Manhattan grid.
5. Portrait of landscape designer and 
architect Frederick Law Olmsted by 
Sargent, John Singer, 1895.
6a. New York. Seneca Village, which 
ran along the Westside of what would 
become Central Park, ca. 1850.
6b. New York, Greensward Study for 
Central Park. Detail of plan with crossing of different paths and roads.
Civilized Wilderness: 
The Politics and Parks of Olmsted
5
6a
6b
4
•
parks movement => open public green space to the helath and vitality of urban populationsd => iideology of public park
•
- raction to prevailing miasma theory of disease
•
all in mid 1800
cemetery as public spaces => rediscovered
park can inﬂuence developement
park is a public work!
crossing points 
open air, reception hall
party in open area, formal 
landscape character, 
with terrace
als informal areac
formal
before sheep, now picnic
the ramble, the ravine area etc. which gives different atmospheres like river or waterfall, or stones next to a walkway <=> landscaping
G
⑭
O

## S. 5

4
1.09
7. New York. Central Park, Greensward Study, 
by Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, 
1858. Red arrows with numbers indicate the 
locations of the views.
8. New York. Central Park, Greensward Study, 
Viewpoint No. 1 (“Near Fifth Avenue”).
9. New York. Central Park, Greensward Study, 
Viewpoint No. 2 (“Lower playground”). 
Civilized Wilderness: 
The Politics and Parks of Olmsted
7
8
9
people where taken off site => urban design is repeated as a displacement of people => urban design isnot always good!
real
imagining
for central park
another viewpoint

## S. 6

5
1.09
11
12
Civilized Wilderness: 
The Politics and Parks of Olmsted
13
14
10
10. New York. Central Park, Greensward Study, 
Viewpoint No. 3 (“Elm Avenue and Terrace from 
Vista Rock”).
11. New York. Central Park, Greensward Study, 
Viewpoint No. 4 (“Across the Lake toward Vista 
Rock”). 
12. New York. Central Park, Greensward Study, 
Viewpoint No. 5 (“Across the Lake from Vista 
Rock”). 
13. New York. Central Park, Greensward Study, 
Viewpoint No. 7 (“Looking south from Bogardus 
Hill”). 
14. New York. Central Park, Greensward Study, 
Viewpoint No. 9 (“Bogardus Hill and Monumental 
Tower”).

## S. 7

6
1.09
Titel: Civilized Wilderness: 
The Politics and Parks of Olmsted
15
17
16
•
introducing => immersive atmospheres in city center of manhattan
•
how is the mobility? urban design is trying to react to mobility

## S. 8

7
1.09
18a
18b
15. New York, Greensward Study for Central Park by Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, 1858. Profiles of the 
Central Park on the lines of the VIth & VIIth Avenues prolonged from 59th to 110th Street.
16. New York, Greensward Study for Central Park by Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, 1858. Garden Arcade 
Building
17. New York, Greensward Study for Central Park by Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, 1858. Flower Garden.
18a. New York, Greensward Study for Central Park by Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, 1858. Belvedere-
South Elevation.
18b.New York, Greensward Study for Central Park by Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, 1858. The Terrace.
19. William I. Taylor. The City of New York (detail), 1879.
Titel: Civilized Wilderness: 
The Politics and Parks of Olmsted
19
terrace after the formal walkway
unsing principle of symmetry, rythm etc.
new built elements => pavilion=> belvedere
now im close to… => indicator

## S. 9

8
1.09
20
22
21
23
20-21. New York, City of Brooklyn, Park Way. By Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, 1868.
22-23. Buffalo. Park System. By Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, 1876.
Titel: Civilized Wilderness: 
The Politics and Parks of Olmsted
90m wide road => allign with trees (creating green atmosphere and for horse carrages and waggons)
allow various form of mobilty
waggons
now it switched for car
as if you would drive through a park
connections from park to park => olmstead thought, that you would be continously in a parc => constantly parklike environment but still in urban landscape

## S. 10

9
1.09
26
24. Boston, Emerald Necklace by Frederick Law Olmsted, 1878. General Plan.
25. Boston, Emerald Necklace by Frederick Law Olmsted, 1878. 
Plan of Franklin Park.
26. Boston, Emerald Necklace by Frederick Law Olmsted, 1878. 
View of the existing agricultural land.
27. Boston, Emerald Necklace by Frederick Law Olmsted, 1878. 
Plan of Harvard Arboretum.
28. Boston, Emerald Necklace by Frederick Law Olmsted, 1878. 
View of typical bridge.
29. Boston, Emerald Necklace by Frederick Law Olmsted, 1878. 
View of Riverway portion.
Civilized Wilderness: 
The Politics and Parks of Olmsted
25
24
emerald Necklace (boston) => 1878, fastly growing city => then already as big as zürich, little green space etc. => olmsted 
=> necklace because several parks and bound together with parkway system => wants it to be thought that it was 
already always there (of course its artiﬁcially done)
franklin park => formal spaces and open spaces etc.
=> mainly for leisure => leisure space => open green spaces such as sport, chillin
and stuff
franklin
agriculture thought
harvard arboretum
jamaica park/pond

## S. 11

10
1.09
28
27
29
Civilized Wilderness: 
The Politics and Parks of Olmsted
educational space, learing different species (trees etc) learning about nature => variety of different species
redesign into a park area, rerouting and reshaping river, banks, trees etc.

## S. 12

11
1.09
31
32
33
34
30
Civilized Wilderness: 
The Politics and Parks of Olmsted
water park/pond => walkway around and entry points into pond (with pavilion etc.) => appreciate pond
sevage like area before (leftover) bcs ground was not stabe (not urbanisable)
now youre half in nature with pond and on other side the city

## S. 13

12
1.09

 





 
























 #





 !#
"" !
!!
" !
!
!
!
 !"
 " !!%&
 "
&"
#!" "
"
!"

"
 
!"!" 
"$
"


" "

 

%$$ 

 &
 &

 
'

 

("$

%$$ 
 %$

%$$ 
" &
" &
$"#
 " $%
! (!!'
'!&$$%&#

!&$# %
& % %! '
!)$%#"'
( &'
&&,
#+ &'#"'
&&)
&&)
#!!#"* ')()
%##%$,")+
()
'" $)%$)
'"()
%-"()%$)
'#%$))
%$)
)#+
 
 




 

 
!''$+
$/
'&+$$'
)#)!
!.!,,'!2 
*!-*).
'!) 
,*' .
,&%!1.
/(*' .0!

'(%'' 3$
 .*$1

*2$(** 3$

-5*01-,1
 
 


  

 
 
 
 


 



 
     

   

   
 


 





 ,1$/!2/51
-/1-,1
$01 (,1
 *)(**1

 


 



 



 

 






 

 














 
 














 









  
  

   
 



 








 


















(!0+%1'!2%
 




%-20%2
 





 

  











8


 

 '"&!$#%+%!1%1%%/.12%$0%'3+!2).-1"%#!31%
2(%64!06&0.,/!0*2./!0*-,.12.&2(%/!0*1$.'1
,312"%.-+%!1(


































-&1*$".&(*/.*()6"8
".3&1#4183
",3&13



!

/6&13





!
 




!
&1&'/1%3
,/4$&23&13
"*1'*&,%3
7&3&13
"13-/43)3
,"1&.%/.3
&1+&,&83
&"'216
")56/%1(8)

 


 




















 
 
 

245;6,8)
!
 
 






 
2/70&758)
"%5,-1+6216
"%5,-1+6216
 $

)164)6



%0)56244294
200219)%/6,8)"
200219)%/6,8)



!"$
 !"$
  
  
 " 
%5);8)43%55
5570-1+64%8)/*4204/-1+62164))6629%4(54%1./-1%4.
4%1./-1%4.412/(4&24)67021/;
9990&6%'20
)0)19*@
"$%"
"
 $"
!"
&#
 )
%
#$$%
 #!$

"&"
# 
 
 "$#$"
%&"#$)




 



 
 


24.24.24.24.


 



 


 

##%#$$#
#$$ %#
"
"
'






 
 
!
'







 
 !
'





 
 
!



!
 "#$#
$$!
" (%")
" 
## 
 "#$"
$ '
" (%")
" ##
 ' 
"
# %$
)
')
)
"
#
"
%"
 #!$
&#
')
!"
 

 









 










 






 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 







 





1*94.:0*;.
!240925"-
*9=*9-#;

29,<2;
92=.
Schoolmaster Hill: Named for Ralph Waldo Emerson 
who lived near this site in the 1820s when he was a 
schoolteacher in Roxbury. This hidden spot has picnic 
tables, century-old white pines, and offers a spectacular 
view across the park and to the Blue Hills beyond.
The Wilderness: A 65-acre native oak forest with 
meandering paths and huge Roxbury puddingstone 
outcroppings, the Wilderness is a picturesque landscape 
and a good example of urban woodlands. 
The 99 Steps/Ellicott Arch 
Scarboro Pond and Hill 
Peters Hill: The highest point in the Emerald Necklace, 
Peters Hill (240 feet) offers spectacular views of Jamaica 
Plain, Roslindale, and the Boston skyline.
Explorers Garden: The area around Chinese Path 
has long been used by researchers to test the hardiness 
of new plants gathered from around the world by plant 
explorers. Don’t miss rare and unusual plants like the 
dove tree, paperbark maple, or Franklinia. 
Larz Anderson Bonsai Collection: See the oldest 
and smallest trees at the Arboretum. Open mid-April to 
early November.
Hunnewell Building: This building houses 
administrative ofﬁces, a library open to the public, and a 
visitor center with knowledgeable staff to help make the 
most of your visit. Maps, brochures, restrooms, as well as 
a small bookstore. Visitor center hours: Mon–Fri 9am–4pm, 
Sat 10am–4pm, Sun noon–4pm
Jamaica Pond Boathouse/Bandstand: Built in 
1912, these Tudor-style structures add a rustic element 
to the pond. Visitors can rent sailboats or rowboats to 
enjoy unique views of the park or simply drift on the 
water (www.courageoussailing.org). The Bandstand is home 
to numerous recreational, educational, and cultural 
activities. The Boathouse is open April 1 through Veteran’s Day. 
Parkman Memorial: Daniel Chester French, Sculptor
Pinebank Promontory: A peaceful spot in this 
busy park, the promontory’s stunning views across the 
Pond and cooling breezes through tall pines made it an 
attractive site for three successive mansions in the 1800s. 
Today, a granite outline marks the footprint of the last 
mansion that stood here. 
Ward’s Pond: This secluded pond is a glacial “kettlehole” formed at the end of the last ice age. A serene, 
heavily wooded area, the visitor ﬁnds a quiet wilderness, 
steps from the surrounding city. 
Wildﬂower meadow: Once the site of an indoor ice 
skating rink, the meadow now offers unique habitat for 
butterﬂies, bees, and other pollinators.
Daisy Field: Olmsted originally designed this as a large 
meadow surrounded by woods. Today, playing ﬁelds serve 
community groups for little league, softball, soccer and 
touch football. 
Allerton Overlook: This semi-circular walk descends 
into the park and provides scenic views of the banks and 
islands of Leverett Pond. 
Leverett Pond: Leverett Pond is a ﬁne example 
of Olmsted’s skill combining landscape, water, and 
structure into his designs. Islands were created to provide 
both visual interest and waterfowl breeding area.
Bellevue Street Bridge: 
Chapel Street Bridge Area/Historic Bridle 
Paths: Bridges played a key role in all of Olmsted’s work, 
not only along rivers, but everywhere that he sought to 
separate different modes of transportation. The Chapel 
Street Bridge separated walkers above from the bridle 
path below. 
Round House Shelter
Joseph Lee Playground (Clemente Field): 
This area accommodates softball, soccer, lacrosse, 
football, basketball and a recreational running track. One 
of the diamonds was named in honor of Roberto 
Clemente—the ﬁrst Latin American elected to the 
Baseball Hall of Fame—who died in a plane crash while 
doing humanitarian work in Central America.
3
1
2
P A R K F E A T U R E S
4
8
6
11
9
10
7
12
13
14
15
16
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
parks
E M E R A L D
NECKLACE
WALKING AND RUNNING DISTANCES
Public Garden, at Charles St., to Charlesgate East: 
 roundtrip 2.5 miles
Back Bay Fens Loop (Endpoints: Boylston Bridge & Ave Louis 
 
 Pasteur): roundtrip 1.6 miles
 
Riverway Loop (Fenway T Station to Netherlands Road): 
 roundtrip 1.5 miles
Leverett Pond Loop (Good for families with small children): 
 roundtrip .7 mile
Jamaica Pond Circumference: 1.5 miles 
Arnold Arboretum, Hunnewell Bldg. to Peter’s Hill Summit : 
 
 roundtrip 3.5 miles 
Franklin Park Walking Loop: 2.5 miles
White Stadium
Overlook Shelter Ruins: Originally a ﬁeld house, it 
was one of the few structures Olmsted ever designed. The 
site was the home to Elma Lewis’ Playhouse in the Park in 
the ’60s and ’70s, and jazz greats, including Duke Ellington, 
performed here.
The Playstead: A large, active sports area that accommodates basketball, tennis and many ﬁeld sports.
Franklin Park Zoo: Founded in 1912, the zoo’s 72 
acres are home to lions, tigers, giraffes, and more. Visitors 
to the signature Tropical Forest can stand face-to-face with 
the Zoo’s seven gorillas at one of ﬁve glass viewing stations. 
Heroic statues by Daniel Chester French ﬂank the north 
entrance. $ www.franklinparkzoo.org
William J. Devine Golf Course: Originally a sheep 
meadow in Olmsted’s design, this 18-hole facility is the 
second oldest public golf course in the country. Open year 
round, weather permitting. $ 617.265.4084
 
“The Liberator” and founder of the New England Anti- 
Slavery Society, Garrison was a powerful voice in the 
abolitionist movement. Olin Levi Warner, Sculptor
 
Father who also started the central banking system, 
welcomes visitors to the Mall between Arlington and 
Berkeley streets. Dr. William Rimmer, Sculptor 
9/11 Memorial
George Washington Statue: Thomas Ball, Sculptor
Swan Boats: These iconic pedal boats ﬁrst appeared on 
the Lagoon in 1877. Designed by Robert Paget, they are still 
owned and operated by the Paget Family. $
Make Way for Ducklings Sculpture: Mrs. Mallard and her 
eight ducklings were created as a tribute to Robert McCloskey, 
author of a children’s book about ducks that live in the Public 
Garden’s Lagoon. Nancy Schön, Sculptor
Victory Gardens: Victory Gardens were cultivated during World Wars I and II to ease demand on the wartime 
food supply. Today the plots are tended by recreational 
gardeners who pay a small yearly fee—and grow much more 
than vegetables.
Boylston Bridge: Designed by prominent 19th-century 
architect H. H. Richardson, this bridge is constructed of Cape 
Ann granite. Projecting bays, or “tourelles,” offer sweeping 
views across the Fens.
Leif Eriksson Statue 
Boston Women’s Memorial: Mayor Thomas M. Menino 
reserved the site for a women’s memorial in 1992. The Boston 
Women’s Commission selected Abigail Adams, Lucy Stone, 
and Phillis Wheatley as exemplary ﬁgures. Meredith Bergmann, 
Sculptor 
Samuel Eliot Morison Statue: This scholar, educator, 
and maritime historian was the Pulitzer-prize winning author 
of the “Oxford History of the United States” (1927) and 
“The Oxford History of the American People” (1965). 
Penelope Jencks, Sculptor
Central Burying Ground: Purchased in 1756 and 
added to the Common in 1839, this is the ﬁnal resting 
place for Revolutionary War soldiers and many others. 
Soldiers and Sailors Civil War Monument: 
Martin Milmore, Sculptor
Frog Pond: Site of 1848’s “Water Celebration” inaugurating
the city’s public water system, today the pond serves as a 
skating rink in the winter and a supervised wading pool in 
the summer. The Tadpole Playground is nearby.
Shaw Memorial: This honors the 54th Regiment of the 
Massachusetts infantry. Led by Colonel Robert Gould Shaw, 
the 54th was the ﬁrst free black regiment in the Union. 
Bronze relief by Augustus Saint-Gaudens. Granite frame and 
terrace by Charles F. McKim
Brewer Fountain
Boston Common Visitors’ Center and Park 
Ranger Station: Maps, tourist information, and restrooms. This also marks the start of the Freedom Trail ®. 
Hours: Monday–Saturday, 8:30 am–5pm; Sunday 10am–6pm
James P. Kelleher Rose Garden: Designed by 
landscape architect Arthur Shurcliff in the 1920s, this 
garden was restored by the City of Boston and the 
Emerald Necklace Conservancy. Combining the best of 
old and new roses, today’s garden includes over 1,500 
plants representing 200 different varieties.
War Memorials
Japanese Bell: Found on a scrap heap in Yokosuka, 
this beautiful 325-year-old temple bell was brought 
back by sailors on the USS Boston in 1945. In 1953, the 
Japanese government wished it to remain in Boston as a 
gesture of world peace.
Gatehouses: These massive, granite buildings in the 
Richardsonian style, were built to regulate the waters of 
Stony Brook ﬂowing into the Muddy River. (Future site 
of Emerald Necklace Conservancy visitor center)
5
17 
If you would like to add physical activity to your daily life, the 
Emerald Necklace offers beautiful paths that are convenient to 
different neighborhoods. Here are a few suggestions. 
Distances are approximate
34
William Lloyd Garrison Statue: Publisher of
Alexander Hamilton Statue: Hamilton, a Founding 
31 
13 
10 
Map conceived and produced by the Emerald Necklace Conservancy with its Park Overseers 
and with the National Park Service (Challenge Cost Share Program) 
36
35
30. Boston, Emerald Necklace by Frederick Law Olmsted, 1878. 
Lawn tennis in Franklin Park.
31. Boston, Emerald Necklace by Frederick Law Olmsted, 1878. 
Plan of Jamaica Park,
32. Boston, Emerald Necklace by Frederick Law Olmsted, 1878. 
Plan of Back Bay.
33. Boston, Emerald Necklace by Frederick Law Olmsted, 1878. 
Plan of a Parkway.
34. Boston, Emerald Necklace by Frederick Law Olmsted, 1878. 
Plan of Charlesbank.
35. Boston, Emerald Necklace by Frederick Law Olmsted, 1878. 
Part of Ward II
36. Boston, Emerald Necklace by Frederick Law Olmsted
Civilized Wilderness: 
The Politics and Parks of Olmsted
charhles river

## S. 14

13
1.09
37. Chicago, World’s Columbian Exposition by Daniel Burnham and Frederick Law Olmsted, 1893. General map showing how 
much of the fair’s buildings were laid out on axis with the court of honor.
38. Chicago, World’s Columbian Exposition by Daniel Burnham and Frederick Law Olmsted, 1893. Viewed from the far end of the 
Great Basin, the Administration Building looms over the court of honor and the surrounding great buildings of the fair.
39. Chicago, World’s Columbian Exposition by Daniel Burnham and Frederick Law Olmsted, 1893. View of Midway.
37
38
39
The City Beautiful: 
The Reform Aesthetics of Burnham
city beautiful movement:
1.
basi premise: through reform of the urban landscape, toghethera
2.
aimed t oachieve acultural parity with the cities of europe
3.
inspired by the beaux arts movmenet dveloped at the paris ecole des baux arts
4.
basi premise: through reform of the urban landscape, toghether with policies in other sectors, it would be possible to control the problems caused by the 
growing urban population
The improvement of towns and cities => gardening, green space => but also new ästhetics => civil aesthetics
daniel hudson Burnham to implement all these ideas in city
1893: big fair ground => modern city => modern transport
by train and boat => for arriving
formal axes => wide city => not ﬁlthy and shiny => new dignity => classical 
principals
designed to its smallest details
controlled composition
restaaurants and ferry wheel => pushed out of focus => not monumental 
etc. => it is located next to it
7·
-

## S. 15

14
1.09
40. Chicago, World’s Columbian Exposition by Daniel Burnham and Frederick Law Olmsted,1893. United States Government 
Building with in the foreground the Ho-O-Den, a replica medieval Japanese palace. 
41. Chicago, World’s Columbian Exposition by Daniel Burnham and Frederick Law Olmsted,1893. Administration Building which 
set the standard for all the main buildings at the Exposition.
42. Chicago, World’s Columbian Exposition by Daniel Burnham and Frederick Law Olmsted, 1893.
40
41
42
The City Beautiful: 
The Reform Aesthetics of Burnham
temporary buildings => symbolise grand architecture => order, dignity, harmony

## S. 16

15
1.09
43
44
45
47
46
43. Chicago, World’s Columbian Exposition by Daniel Burnham and Frederick Law Olmsted, 1893. The Agricultural Building.
44. Chicago, World’s Columbian Exposition by Daniel Burnham and Frederick Law Olmsted, 1893. The vast Manufactures and Liberal Arts Building easily dwarfed any other structure in the White City.
45. Chicago, World’s Columbian Exposition by Daniel Burnham and Frederick Law Olmsted, 1893. The Midway was a 
collection of various themed environments and funhouses. 
46. Chicago, World’s Columbian Exposition by Daniel Burnham and Frederick Law Olmsted,1893. With its colorful glazing and flags, the Fisheries Building stood apart from its 
Beaux-Arts neighbors.
47. Chicago, World’s Columbian Exposition by Daniel Burnham and Frederick Law Olmsted, 1893. The Machinery Hall, 
or “Palace of Mechanic Arts,” displaying American industrial 
products and serving as the White City’s power plant.
The City Beautiful: 
The Reform Aesthetics of Burnham

## S. 17

16
1.09
48
49
48. Chicago, World’s Columbian Exposition by Daniel Burnham and Frederick Law Olmsted, 1893. The Midway, a collection of various themed 
environments and funhouses.
49. Washington, Mc Millan Plan by Daniel Burnham, Frederick Law Olmsted, Charles F. McKim et al., 1901. Poster on the most beautiful city.
The City Beautiful: 
The Reform Aesthetics of Burnham

## S. 18

17
1.09
50. Washington, Comparison between the urban of L’Enfant (1791) and the Mc Millan Plan (1901).
by Burnham, Olmsted and others, 1901.
The City Beautiful: 
The Reform Aesthetics of Burnham
50

## S. 19

18
1.09
51
51. Washington. McMillan Plan, Aerial View by F. L V. Hoppin. 
By Burnham, Olmsted, McKim et al., 1901.
The City Beautiful: 
The Reform Aesthetics of Burnham
formation and symmetrie =>

## S. 20

19
1.09
52
55
53
54
The City Beautiful: 
The Reform Aesthetics of Burnham
52. Washington, Mc Millan Plan by Daniel Burnham, Frederick Law 
Olmsted, Charles F. McKim et al., 1901. Map of the public reservations 
for a ‘necklace’ of parks.
53. Washington, Mc Millan Plan by Burnham, Olmsted, McKim et al., 
1901. Plan with indication of new highways, new railroads and school 
buildings.
54. Washington, Mc Millan Plan by Burnham, Olmsted, McKim et al., 
1901. Plan of new street system.
55. Washington, Mc Millan Plan by Burnham, Olmsted, McKim et al., 
1901. The central figure of the Mall.
water party => opennes and freshness => but also formness and dignity on other side

## S. 21

20
1.09
56
58
59
57
56. Washington, Mc Millan Plan by Burnham, Olmsted, McKim et al., 1901. 
View of the Mall.
57. Washington, Mc Millan Plan by Burnham, Olmsted, McKim et al., 1901. 
View towards the Mall.
58. Washington, Mc Millan Plan by Burnham, Olmsted, McKim et al., 1901. 
Aerial view with different elements of the Mall.
59. Washington, Mc Millan Plan by Burnham, Olmsted, McKim et al., 1901. 
Aerial view.
The City Beautiful: 
The Reform Aesthetics of Burnham
washington beeing introduced to beautiful city

## S. 22

21
1.09
60
61
60. Plan of Chicago by Daniel Burnham and Edward H. Bennett, 1909.
61. Plan of Chicago by Daniel Burnham and Edward H. Bennett, 1909.
Plan of the complete system of street circulation; railway stations; parks, boulevards circuits and radial 
arteries; public recreation piers, yacht harbor, and pleasure-boat priers; treatment of Grant Park; the 
main axis and the Civic Center. Presenting the city as a complete organism in which all its functions are 
related one to another in such a manner that it will become a unit.
The City Beautiful: 
The Reform Aesthetics of Burnham
plan of chicago => the commercial club (traders, businessman) are planners => will to change chicago to a grand city and dignity it
=> made a railroad plan and street syste m=> mobilty structure => and a parc system connected

## S. 23

22
1.09
62
63
64
62. Plan of Chicago by Daniel Burnham and Edward H. Bennett, 1909. Proposed Boulevard (Michigan 
Avenue) to connect north and south sides of the River; view looking north from Washington Street.
63. Plan of Chicago by Daniel Burnham and Edward H. Bennett, 1909. View looking West.
64. Plan of Chicago by Daniel Burnham and Edward H. Bennett, 1909. View, looking west, of the proposed Civic Center.
The City Beautiful: 
The Reform Aesthetics of Burnham
great city like paris or berin => this is idea => big boulevard etc => it should be a world city => big public institutions => micing stuff from paris
center of axis
= monument

## S. 24

23
1.09
67
65
66
68
The City Beautiful: 
The Reform Aesthetics of Burnham
system of loops => all comming together in city center 
and also green structure

## S. 25

24
1.09
65. Plan of Chicago by Daniel Burnham and Edward H. Bennett, 1909. Proposed 
Twelfth Street Boulevard at intersection with Michigan Avenue. The proposed railway terminals are shown facing the Boulevard.
66. Plan of Chicago by Daniel Burnham and Edward H. Bennett, 1909. Proposed 
double roadway on Michigan Avenue looking towards the south.
67. Plan of Chicago by Daniel Burnham and Edward H. Bennett, 1909. Diagram of 
the City showing complete system of inner circuits including general traction subway circuit and general railroad freight circuit.
68. Plan of Chicago by Daniel Burnham and Edward H. Bennett, 1909. Diagram of 
the City center, showing the proposed arrangement of railroad passenger stations, 
the complete traction system, including rapid transit subways, and elevated roads, 
and the circuit subway line. Railroads are denoted by solid red lines. Dashed red 
lines are subway connections to passenger stations, additional circuits and rapid 
transit lines. Dashed blue lines are proposed subway system.
69. Plan of Chicago by Daniel Burnham and Edward H. Bennett, 1909. Plan of the 
center of the city, showing present streets and boulevard system. The proposed 
arteries and streets widening are in red.
69
The City Beautiful: 
The Reform Aesthetics of Burnham

## S. 26

25
1.09
Canberra: 
The City Beautiful, Down Under
70
71
67
72
73
70. Walter Burley Griffin and Marion Mahony in Melbourne, 1918.
71. Canberra. Competition entry by Griffin and Mahony, showing the overall plan for the Australian Federal Capital.
72. Canberra. Schematic drawing by Griffin and Mahony, explaining the key concepts of the overall plan.
73. Canberra. Schematic drawing by Griffin and Mahony, explaining the layout of the Australian National University.
canberra, australia => the city beautiful, down under
=> deﬁnyng new capital for australia => at beginning of australia => 7 colonies => beg. 1901 => bring all colonies together => what will become the capital => melbourne and sydney
capital of canberra => beginning was nothing there (middle of nowhere, local inhabitants)
to rival london in population, paris in beauti, athens in culture and chicago in enterprise => 
ambitious competition
axis with city beautiful 
and natural part
ainslie peak
land axis
water axis
municipal axis
X

## S. 27

26
1.09
75
76
74
Canberra: 
The City Beautiful, Down Under
74. Canberra. Competition entry by Griffin and Mahony, showing the several functional 
zones.
75. Canberra. Section through the monumental axis, which was part of the competition 
entry by Griffin and Mahony.
76. Entry for the ‚Commonwealth of Australia Federal Capital Competition‘ by Griffin 
and Mahony, 1912.
they need planners cmming from „city beautiful“ => for beiing variant
axis looking at administratives

## S. 28

27
1.09
Further reading:
Beveridge, Charles E, Paul Rocheleau, and David Larkin. Frederick Law Olmsted: Designing the American Landscape. New 
York: Rizzoli International, 2012.
Cullingworth, John B. The Political Culture of Planning: American 
Land Use Planning in Comparative Perspective. New York u.a: 
Routledge, 1993.
Fein, Albert. Frederick Law Olmsted and the American Environmental Tradition. New York, N.Y: Braziller, 1973.
Stevenson, Elizabeth. Park Maker: A Life of Frederick Law Olmsted. New Brunswick [N.J.: Transaction Publishers, 2000.
Wilson, William H. The City Beautiful Movement. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1994.
Sources Images:
Beveridge, Charles E, Paul Rocheleau, and David Larkin. Frederick Law Olmsted: Designing the American 
Landscape. New York: Rizzoli International, 2012.
Cullingworth, John B. The Political Culture of Planning: 
American Land Use Planning in Comparative Perspective. New York u.a: Routledge, 1993.
Fein, Albert. Frederick Law Olmsted and the American Environmental Tradition. New York, N.Y: Braziller, 
1973.
Stevenson, Elizabeth. Park Maker: A Life of Frederick 
Law Olmsted. New Brunswick [N.J.: Transaction Publishers, 2000.
ETH Collection Lampugnani
Wikimedia Commons
Dates and Facts
New York, Central Park by Olmsted and Vaux 
 
1858
Boston, Emerald Necklace by Olmsted 
 
1878
World’s Columbian Exposition by Burnham 
 
1893
Pittsburgh Survey 
 
 
 
 
1901
Washington, Mc Millan Plan 
 
 
 
1901
Chicago Plan by Burnham 
 
 
 
1909
