---
titel: "B1.03-SCRIPT"
quelle: "Studium Andrin (HSLU/ETH)"
datei: "B1.03-SCRIPT.pdf"
seiten: 25
ocr-seiten: 0
tags: [bauwissen, vorlesung]
---

# B1.03-SCRIPT

## S. 2

2
1.03
The Idea of the Polis: 
Rome, Greece and Beyond 
The colonial empires of Greece and Rome were essential 
to propel the development of urban design in that they not 
only initiated a fundamental exchange of ideas across regions and cultures, but also raised the issue of how to govern 
territories and people. Urban design was in both cases a 
‘civilizing mission’ that was as much about bringing a specific way of life to distant places, as about conforming people to the norms and forms of the empire.
In Greece, the polis or city-state expressed a specific way 
life and was strongly related to the question of politics. In 
the Roman Empire, the city was conceived as the main unit 
of administration as well as the prime site of contact between the ruler and ruled. The form of the urban layout was 
in early times not intensively discussed by the Greeks and 
Romans. When philosophers as Plato and Aristotle discuss 
the ideal city their main concern are social and political issues, while the material and spatial characteristics of the 
city are taken as self-evident. It is only in Hellenistic times 
that technical literature on urban design starts to emerge. 
This is complemented in Roman times by more cultured 
discussions of authors like Pliny and Frontinus.
An important impetus for the cities of Archaic Greece (1000 
BCE) was the colonial contact with the ideas and realities of 
the ancient East. The idea of the Greek polis became materialized through the design of several public institutions and 
figures of which the agora was the prime one. Originally no 
more than a large open space the urban figure of the agora 
would soon turn into a cluster of buildings and open spaces 
including the meeting place for the city council (bouleuterion), the offices for the magristrates, temples and altars, law 
courts and covered halls or stoa. Hippodamus of Miletus, is 
one of the important references in the urban design of the 
classical Greek City. He has received an important status 
thanks to Aristotle, who accredited him with the invention 
of orthogonal gridded urban planning. Cities like Olynthos 
and Priene illustrate how this so called ‘gridiron plan’ could 
be applied to a large variety of sites.
Alexander the Great left an indelible mark on every aspect 
of the political, social, and economic life of his time. The familiar world of the self-contained city-state was dead. Men 
were faced with vast new horizons, new commercial opportunities and markets, new social and religious problems 
and preoccupations. Prominent among the latter was the 
mutual influence of Greek thought and this of the time-old 
cultures of the ancient East. From this emerged two important tendencies: a monumentalization of existing, freely 
developed Greek cities (Pergamon) and the design of new 
Greek cities that were everywhere established in the freshly 
conquered lands of Egypt, Syria, and beyond.
The emergence of Rome as a rapidly expanding political 
power in the fourth century, also faced it with the question 
of the urban design in military colonies. In cities like Cosa 
the choice of the site and the layout of the walls were determined by defensive logics, but in the general urban layout a correlation between civic and military elements was 
established. Though Roman architects had their formulas, 
urban design was generally characterized by a pragmatic 
attitude which was paired with a large concern for civic 
well-being expressed by the provision of water supply and 
drainage, public spaces and buildings, as well as places for 
public entertainment. This ‘civic dimension’ would leave its 
mark on many future approaches to urban design.

## S. 3

3
1.03
The Idea of the Polis:
From Agora to Stoa
1. Greece and the Agean basin. 
2. Athens, urban plan during Iron Age and through Roman Empire
3. Greece and West Asia, 4th century BCE
4. Greek and Phoenician colonies around the Mediterranean, 550 BCE
5. Athens, Development of the Agora through different periods.
2
1
Agora
-- figures of
urban design

## S. 4

4
1.03
The Idea of the Polis:
From Agora to Stoa
3
4
5
Trade routes
Agora-Place of Politics (Democrats)
Religion
and Religion
OO
I
Bouleuterian
-ospecBildinic Buildingfor Government !

## S. 5

5
1.03
6
7a
7b
6. Athens, the Stoa of Attalos which was built by and named after King Attalos II of Pergamon who ruled between 159 BC and 138 BC. 
Typical of the Hellenistic age, the stoa was more elaborate and larger than the earlier buildings of ancient Athens.
7a. Athens, Acropolis: Longitudinal section of the Odeion of Agrippa. 1st phase. Late 1st century BC.
7b. Athens, Acropolis: plan of the Odeion of Agrippa. 1st phase. Late 1st century BC.
The Idea of the Polis:
From Agora to Stoa
i
E

## S. 6

6
1.03
6
8. Map of the Agora at its fullest development. 2nd century.
The Idea of the Polis:
From Agora to Stoa
heavily decorated -- celebration of being impressive
&
-I
11
Agora
Agara also for
↑
Halk/ohne
--
commercial life
↑
↑
↑
Agorastoo
·
Incentral
so·
discussions
of
library
Paintaines
i
O
↳knowled
and archive denofeial
and culture&

## S. 7

7
1.03
9. Miletus, general urban plan.
10. Miletus. Schematic plan showing the main avenues and in grey the areas that were reserved for public use.
11. Miletus. View of the public buildings south of the Lion Harbor 150 BCE
12. Miletus. Two stages (ca. 300 BCE and 150 BCE) of the development of the public buildings south of the Lion Harbor.
13. Reconstructed ground plan of Olynthus‘ city center
The Idea of the Polis:
Hippodamus and the Classical Greek City
9
10
11
12
13
Topographe
critical/impre
an
Soldier
,artisats
, husbandmen

## S. 8

8
1.03
14
15
The Idea of the Polis:
Hippodamus and the Classical Greek City
steep topography
som
#
s

## S. 9

9
1.03
16
17
18
The Idea of the Polis:
Hippodamus and the Classical Greek City
14. Olynthus. Plan of the city. 4th century BC.
15. Olynthus, general urban plan with dwelling typologies
16. Olynthus, axonometry of dwelling typologies with courtyards
17. Plan of City Blocks, Olynthus, Macedonia, Greece, 430-348 B.C.
18. Olynthus, Plan of a single house
E Levels
G

## S. 10

10
1.03
20
21
20. The plan of the lower city of Priene shows the rectangular grid with blocks measuring about 35 x 47 meters.
21. Priene, City plan with higher part of Acropolis and lower gridded part
22. Priene, the interior of the Bouleuterion
23. Priene, reconstruction of the theatre
The Idea of the Polis:
Hippodamus and the Classical Greek City
Theater
Relig
Bouti
in
O
Market
erstin
bixzom
Priene
↳Steep
↳two-part city

## S. 11

11
1.03
22
23
The Idea of the Polis:
Hippodamus and the Classical Greek City

## S. 12

12
1.03
24
25
24. Priene, plans of house nr 33 (phase 1 (West) and phase 2)
25. Priene, house no. 33 West
26. Pergamon. Reconstruction of the Acropolis
27. Pergamon, Plan of the Acropolis, 197-159BC.
The Idea of the Polis:
Hippodamus and the Classical Greek City
More enangabed

## S. 13

13
1.03
26
27
The Idea of the Polis:
The Cities of Hellenistic Asia Minor and Syria: 323 - 31 BC

## S. 14

14
1.03
28a
28b
The Idea of the Polis:
The Cities of Hellenistic Asia Minor and Syria: 323 - 31 BC
28a. The city of Dura-Europos was founded around 300 BC as a 
stronghold at the Euphrates River on the road between Antioch 
and Seleucia. The grid pattern, with block sizes of 70 x 35 meters 
and a street width of 7-8 meters, dated from the second century 
BC, when Dura was rebuilt as a Hellenistic city.
28b. Dura-Europos. Plan showing the dense urban fabric, c. 
300BC.

## S. 15

15
1.03
29
30
31
The Idea of the Polis:
The Beginning of Urbanism in the West
29. Marzabotto. Grided principle on existing topography.
30. Marzabotto, urban plan
31. Marzabotto. View.

## S. 16

16
1.03
The Idea of the Polis:
Town Planning in Roman Italy and its Empire
32
33
maximos
Castrum
= military camp
cloaka
Locopied
one another
·
end
d

## S. 17

17
1.03
The Idea of the Polis:
Town Planning in Roman Italy and its Empire
34
35
32. Novaesium, Lower Germany. Diagram of military camp.
33. City plan Rome, republican period
34. Rome, Transformation of the Republican Forum under Julius Cesar and Augustus.
35. Rome, plan of the Palatine Hill Complex. The left side was known as Domus Flavia and 
used for political functions, with: (1) the basilica, (2) Aula Regia throne room, (3) Laraium 
with family shrines, (4) State triclinium dining hall. The right side (5) encompassed the Domus Augustana, the domestic half of the palace, the Palace Stadium (6) and the concave 
terrace for viewing. The Circus Maximus was also part.
domos-- place
,tight grid
, wealthy people
ora
=ForumRoman
empire
Insulae
-> place
, urban Blocks
, but not 1-fam
. House,
Ag &
↓↓
more appartement Block
, collective,piled
O
discussing governunt
Forum = not that multifunctional
than Agora

## S. 18

18
1.03
The Idea of the Polis:
Town Planning in Roman Italy and its Empire
36
37
38
39
36. Cosa, city plan with indication of housing neighborhood and 
forum
37. Tree types of Roman wall facing: opus incertum, opus reticulatum and opus testaceum.
38. Cosa, Arx temples: Capitolium and Mater Matututa
39. Cosa, Forum as it emerged in its sixth phase.

## S. 19

19
1.03
The Idea of the Polis:
Town Planning in Roman Italy and its Empire
40
40. Timgad, Algeria. The irregular unplanned growth of the second century BCE 
contrasts vividly with the rigid layout of the military colony (100BCE).
41. Timgad, Algeria is a classical example of a Roman colonial gridiron town. All 
the fourfold elements of Roman castrametion and urban development are brought 
together.
41
-
Derman
P

## S. 20

20
1.03
The Idea of the Polis:
Town Planning in Roman Italy and its Empire
42
43
44
42. Bay of Naples with some of the Roman cities outside of Rome, amongst others 
Pompeii.
43. Pompei, urban plan with indication of forum and other public structures.
44. Street view at Pompeii. 
45. Pompei, plan of the forum with its different components such as various temples, the basilica and the Mecellum.
45

## S. 21

21
1.03
The Idea of the Polis:
Town Planning in Roman Italy and its Empire
46
47
48
49
still
todal grid is
reconisable
-
I

## S. 22

22
1.03
The Idea of the Polis:
Town Planning in Roman Italy and its Empire
50
46. Verona. Refounded on level ground (ca 100 BCE). The early town may have occupied the hill on the north bank of the river.
47. Verona. Grid plan for the refoundation (ca. 100 BCE)
48./49. Lucca. A notable example of a Roman gridded street layout which was preserved throughout the Middle Ages and enclosed 
within a sixteenth-century defensive circuit.
50. Comparison of three town plans: 1. Etruscan city of Marzabotto with grid of long blocks (ca. 400 BCE), 2. Timgad, Algeria (ca. 100 
BCE) showing grid with short blocks with fora at crossroads and large public buildings on outskirts, 3. Djemila, Algeria (ca. 100 BCE) 
which follows the natural topography while using typical Roman structures.

## S. 23

23
1.03
51. Lepcis Magna. Succesive stages in the development of the urban plan. (1) the pre-Roman nucleus, (2) the first Roman city, (3) After 
8 BCE, (4) early first century, (5) second century and (6) early third century. 
52. Augusta Rarica (August), near Basel. Plan of the military colony founded in 43 BCE.
The Idea of the Polis:
Town Planning in Roman Italy and its Empire
51
1: pre-Roman nucleus
3: after BBC
5: 2nd century AD
2: first Roman city
4: early 1st century AD
6: early 3rd century AD
52-
remains
=
roman city

## S. 24

24
1.03
53
54
53. Augusta Rarica (August), near Basel. The forum complex, rebuilt in its present form in (ca 100): (1) temple and porticoed precinct 
(2) the open forum courtyard, flanked by porticoes and shops (3) basilica, (4) curia, the seat of the town council.
54. Augusta Rarica (August), near Basel. The Basilica-forum complex: the theatre and beyond it, on axis, a temple; and (top left) a large 
covered market.
The Idea of the Polis:
Town Planning in Roman Italy and its Empire

## S. 25

25
1.03
Further reading:
Aldrete, Gregory S. Daily Life in the Roman City: Rome, Pompeii and Ostia. Norman: 
Univ. of Oklahoma Press, 2008.
Bowman, Alan K. Representations of Empire: Rome and the Mediterranean World. Oxford [etc.: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Ewald, Björn C. The Emperor and Rome: Space, Representation, and Ritual. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2015.
Favro, Diane. The Urban Image of Augustan Rome. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2002.
Gates, Charles. Ancient Cities: The Archaeology of Urban Life in the Ancient Near East 
and Egypt, Greece, and Rome. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, 2011.
Martin-McAuliffe, Samantha, and Daniel M. Millette. Ancient Urban Planning in the Mediterranean: New Research Directions. London: Routledge, 2018. 
Owens, E J. The City in the Greek and Roman World. London: Routledge, 2004.
Parkins, Helen. Roman Urbanism: Beyond the Consumer City. London: Routledge, 
2011.
Rykwert, Joseph. The Idea of a Town: The Anthropology of Urban Form in Rome, Italy 
and the Ancient World. London: Faber and Faber, 2010.
Sources Images:
Ching, Francis D. K, Mark Jarzombek, and Vikramaditya Prakash. A Global History of 
Architecture. , 2017. (GA)
 
Ingersoll, Richard, and Spiro Kostof. World Architecture: A Cross-Cultural History. , 
2015. (WA)
 
Gates, Charles. Ancient Cities: The Archaeology of Urban Life in the Ancient Near 
East and Egypt, Greece and Rome. Hoboken: Taylor and Francis, 2013. (AC)
James-Chakraborty, Kathleen. Architecture Since 1400. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, 2014
Dates and Facts
Cultural periods of ancient Greece
Hellenistic cities
Death of Alexander the Great 
 
 
323 BCE
Attalos III bequeathes Pergamon to Rome 133 BCE
Greek and Etruscan cities in Italy
Greek settlements in Italy and Sicily 
 
ca. 8th to 3 th century BCE
Syracuse captured by the Romans 
 
212 BCE
The Etruscans 
 
 
 
ca. 8th to 2nd century BCE
Rome from its origins to the age of emperors
Rome
Foundation (Forum, walls) 
 
 
753 BCE
Etruscan rule 
 
 
 
 
ca. 600 – 509 BCE
Roman Republic 
 
 
509 BCE - 27 BCE
Julius Caesar 
 
 
 
 
60 BCE – 44 BCE
Rome in the age of emperors
Augustus, first Roman emperor 
 
31 BCE – 14 AD
