---
titel: "B1.04-SCRIPT"
quelle: "Studium Andrin (HSLU/ETH)"
datei: "B1.04-SCRIPT.pdf"
seiten: 29
ocr-seiten: 0
tags: [bauwissen, vorlesung]
---

# B1.04-SCRIPT

## S. 2

1
1.04
The Long Middle Ages and their 
Counterparts: 
From the Towns of Tuscany to 
Delhi
The definition of the Middle Ages as “Dark Ages” (as 
Petrarch termed them), bridging the two enlightened 
periods of classical antiquity and the Renaissance, has 
long been outmoded. This historical period, beginning 
with the fall of the Roman Empire as a result of raids 
by northern European tribes of “Vikings” in the late 
antiquity of the fifth and sixth centuries and continuing until the advent of the so-called Italian and English 
renaissances, or rebirths of classical learning, in the 
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, spans an enormous 
long amount of time. It not only affected the classical inheritance in the west, but also included eastern 
Europe, the Middle East, Asia, as well as North and 
Central America.
The Middle Ages saw the birth of Muhammad (c. 570–
632) and his foundation of Islam in the seventh century 
which led to the imperial conflict between East and 
West in the eleventh and twelfth centuries. In Western 
Europe the foundations for modern nationalism and 
modern law were laid. The Middle Ages were also the 
time of the Crusades which triggered the development 
of the concept of chivalry and the knight, but also cultural encounter, exchange and conflict. The need for 
defense would become an important foundational logic for medieval towns, and the castle emerged as a 
military outpost, whether in northern Africa, during the 
Crusades, or in Wales, in the eleventh century.
By the twelfth century, with the centralization of the 
one (Catholic) Church in Europe, came a new architecture for the cathedral—the Gothic—to replace the older Romanesque architecture and thereby to manifest 
the Church’s role in the community in a material way as 
well as in spiritual and political ways. Out of the cathedral and the convent emerged the medieval institution 
of the university, but also new public institutions such 
as hospitals, orphanages and elder houses. 
Around the same time, cities rose up in eastern and 
western Europe as a consequence of trade. New 
commercial patterns, such as the Hanseatic League 
propelled the necessity for new economic centers 
to accompany the development of a bourgeoisie, or 
middle class. These cities required new infrastructures 
that were adequate for trade and shipping. During the 
Middle Ages most cities were unique in plan, function, 
and in social structure. One of the most defining features was their degree of autonomy. This ranged from 
the city-state, which was in most respects sovereign 
and independent, to the very restricted independence 
enjoyed by most small towns. 
-

## S. 3

2
1.04
1. Detailed map depicts the route of the First Crusade (between 1096 and 1099) and route of the Third Crusade.
2. Arab expansion across Near East, North Africa and Europe 634-808.
3. Europe showing the spread of monasticism 320-621.
1
2
3
Religious Patterns and Practices
Religion
as
care of wars

## S. 4

3
1.04
4
5
6
7
8
4. Major cities incorporated in Hansa League
5. Hansa League around 1400.
6. A small medieval town in the Var region
7. Analysis of an aggregation of square cells in built environment by Hillier and Hanson
8. Palermo, survival of Arabic planning in urban fabric.
Commercial Links and Urban Logics & Informal logics and patterns?
oftrade
Hansa city -network
logic
-schematic
Alleastoue ewall
-commercial
Accesaten
es
&
AllesoTe
networking
of knowlede
-> exchange
as well
City = Solution
of city layers before
Arogonestralian family

## S. 5

4
1.04
The Monastery and Beyond:
Towards new urban patterns
9
10
9. Arras, a binary town. The Cité derived from the Roman civitas 
and came to include the cathedral. The medieval town to the 
east of it grew up around the monastery of Saint-Vaast and 
became the commercial quarter. Based on a plan of c. 1435
10. Saint-Gallen, Switzerland. Plan of the different elements of 
the monastery. 9th century
Recenter
recenter
St
.Gallen
A
Monestary
X(
/
cathedral
Bishop
Trade,Gather
↳no uniqueness
Intertwined
urban planning+ Monesto
- sometimes
city states

## S. 6

5
1.04
11
12
13
13. Saint-Gallen, Switzerland. Detailled plan.
1: Entrance, 
2: Church, 
3: Main cloister, 
4: Dormitory, 
5: Refectory, 
6: Cellar and storehouses, 
7: House for pilgrims and poor travelers
8: Writing room and library, 
9: Living room and dormitory for visiting monks,
10: Schoolmaster’s lodging, 
11: School room, 
12: Porter’s lodge
13: Guest quarters, 
14: Brewery and bakery belonging to 13,
15: Towers, 
16: Unknown use, 
17-23: Various animal stalls, 
24: Workshops of coppers and turners, 
25: Storehouse for Brewery
26: Fruit-drying house, 
27: Brewery and bakery for resident monks
28: Workshops of various craftspeople, 
29: Granary
30: House of poultry-keepers, 
31: House of gardeners
32: Burying grounds, 
33: Cloister and living rooms of the ‘oblati’
34: Church for novices and the ill, 
35: Cloister for the seriously ill
36: Hospital Garden, 
37-38: Physician’s quarters
39: Abbot’s house 
11./12. Saint-Gallen, Switzerland. Perspective and Architectural 
model showing towers and transept of the 9th-century Benedictine Monastery.
The Monastery and Beyond:
Towards new urban patterns
ordered wall
little
city
Monaster
I H
dament -

## S. 7

6
1.04
14
15
16
14. England. Map of Burghal Hidage fortifications. 911-914
15. General view of Berwick-upon-Tweed
16. Principle drawing of an Anglo Saxon Burgh in England.
The City as Expression of Defensive Logics:
Of burhs, bastides and fortresses
Burghal Hidage
Rades
.
Principal Drawing of
Burgh
↳Hiding from
↳30km
Radius

## S. 8

7
1.04
17
18
19
17. Pembroke, UK. Aerial view of Pembroke with castle to the right.
18. / 19. Pembroke, UK. Town plans with main urban elements of walls, 
castle, parish church and market. ca. 1254
The City as Expression of Defensive Logics:
Of burhs, bastides and fortresses
Wall city
watchers
h
↳Pempbroke ,whales
↑
outline
Burg
Glimestone
-

## S. 9

8
1.04
20
21
22
20. Pembroke, UK. Town plan with elongated ‘burgage plots’.
21. Pembroke, UK. Plan of castle. ca. 1254
22. Pembroke, UK. Aerial view of castle and burgage plots with 
buildings and kitchen gardens.
The City as Expression of Defensive Logics:
Of burhs, bastides and fortresses
Biggardens , ultivate yourself!

## S. 10

9
1.04
23
24
25
23. Aigues Mortes, France. Aerial view of the medieval town which was erected in 1240 by St. Louis as a base 
for his Crusade to the holy land.
24. General principle of a Bastide.
25. Aigues Mortes, France. General plan of the bastide with at the North-west corner of the plan a citadel or fortress.
The City as Expression of Defensive Logics:
Of burhs, bastides and fortresses

## S. 11

10
1.04
26
27
28
26. Tughlaqabad, India. The largest of the fortresses that would initiate Delhi, 1321-1325.
27. Tughlaqabad, India. Mosque within the fortifications.
28. Tughlaqabad, India. Plan of the fortress with indications of the regular streets pattern.
The City as Expression of Defensive Logics:
Of burhs, bastides and fortresses
Regist islam
-

## S. 12

11
1.04
29
29. Delhi. The once great fortifications of the city of Delhi are shown in this drawing for The „Illustrated London News“ in 1858.
The City as Expression of Defensive Logics:
Of burhs, bastides and fortresses

## S. 13

12
1.04
Mercantile Urban Motifs in Europe
30
31
30. Coblenz. Representation of the town under attack, 1632.
31. Copenhagen. Detailed depiction of the harbor and its urban infrastructure, 1630.
Mercantile logic
Mercantile
of medieral times
style
is reason for survival
transport
-

## S. 14

13
1.04
32
Mercantile Urban Motifs in Europe
32. Paris. Depiction of the walled city with its towers and gates, where river and wall meet, 1530.

## S. 15

14
1.04
33
33. Amsterdam, Oldest surviving map of Amsterdam by Cornelis Anthoniszoon, 1538. On this map one can see the completed medieval Amsterdam, with city walls and gates. As used 
to be customary, the city is drawn from the river IJ, so with the 
north at the bottom.
The Emergence of New Urban Institutions:
Orphanages, Hospitals and Houses for the Elderly

## S. 16

15
1.04
35
36
37
34
34. Amsterdam, The monastery areas inside the city walls around 1578, Drawing of I.H. van Eeghen.
35. Amsterdam with the large new civic institutions of the orphanage (middle) and the hospital (left bottom), by Gerrit de Broen, 1737.
36. Amsterdam, orphanage in the Kalverstraat. Drawn by Balthasar Florisz van Berckenrode, 1631.
37. Amsterdam, The courtyard of the Boys Orphanage in the Kalverstraat 92, seen in the direction of Girls Orphanage, with right connection via the collonade. Copper engraving, published in 1663 in Amsterdam.
The Emergence of New Urban Institutions:
Orphanages, Hospitals and Houses for the Elderly

## S. 17

16
1.04
38
a
b
c
39
40
38. Amsterdam, a. Reconstruction of the Binnengasthuis grounds at the beginning of the 15th century. The drawing 
shows the chapels and rectory residences of both monasteries. 
These parts of the monastery complexes were accessible to 
the pub¬lic. 
b. Reconstruction of the Binnengasthuis grounds right before 
the Alteratie in 1578. The grounds and buildings of both monasteries as taken over by the Binnengasthuis.
c. The Binnengasthuis around 1680.
39. Amsterdam, Binnengasthuis, Part which was known as elderly home. - Plan of a Guest house in Amsterdam
40. Amsterdam, Binnengasthuis, Plan of a Guest house in Amsterdam. ca. 1680
The Emergence of New Urban Institutions:
Orphanages, Hospitals and Houses for the Elderly

## S. 18

17
1.04
41
42
43
41. Pieter Janszoon Saendre¬dam, The Old Town Hall in Amsterdam, 1657. The left-hand part, accessible by the stairs, is 
the former Sint-Elisabethgasthuis.
42. Tonnere, Isometry of the Hôtel-Dieu du Saint-Esprit in Tonnerre. Drawing taken from U. Craemer, Das Hospital als Bautyp des Mittelalters (The hospital as a building type of the Middle Ages Mittelalters). Plan of the Hôtel-Dieu du Saint-Esprit. 
Marguerite de Bourgogne founded the hospital in 1293. The daily management was in the hands of the Order of the Holy 
Spirit. The building consists of an extended sick ward, which led to a small chapel. The chapel is connected to the sick ward 
by way of three arches
43. Tonerre, Interior perspective and Section of the Hôtel-Dieu du Saint-Esprit by Viollet-le-Duc
The Emergence of New Urban Institutions:
Orphanages, Hospitals and Houses for the Elderly

## S. 19

18
1.04
44
45
44. Amsterdam, The New Bridge seen from the west, as public space and with commercial activities.
45. Amsterdam, Voorburgwal. Drawing by Visscher, Claes Jansz, 1608.
The Emergence of New Urban Institutions 
Markets and Guild Houses

## S. 20

19
1.04
46
47
48
46. Map of medieval universities
47. Bologna, 1563. Project and plan of the Archiginnasio.
48. Bologna, City plan by Filippo Gnudi, 1702. Detail showing the situation of the Archiginnasio in the city.
The Emergence of New Urban Institutions:
The University

## S. 21

20
1.04
49
50
51
49./50. Oxford, Merton college, 13th century.
51. Oxford in 1605 was still a walled city, but several colleges 
had been built outside the city walls.
The Emergence of New Urban Institutions
The University

## S. 22

21
1.04
52
53
54
55
52. Amsterdam, Het Sacrament van Mirakel Church survives 
the second major city fire in 1452, Boëtius Adamsz Bolswert 
(ca. 1580-1633).
53. Amsterdam, reconstruction of a medieval house with a 
wooden frame and stone foundations.
54. Netherlands, Late Medieval timber-framed house. A: truss, 
B: cross frame, C: brace construction. 1: rafter, 2: collar, 3: coupled rafter, 4: superimposed tie beam, 5: inclined straight principal, 6: brace, 7: wind brace, 8: curved principal, 9: sole piece/
spur tie, 10: wall plate, 11: roof plate, 12: tie beam, 13: joist 
beam, 14: border joist, 15: main post, 16: sole plate
55. Netherlands, Schematic cross section of a wooden timberframed house (2), a timber-framed house with brick side walls 
(4) and a house with brick walls (5).
The Everyday Urban Fabric
The Timber House

## S. 23

22
1.04
56
56. Amsterdam, street perspective along wooden houses by by Visscher, Claes Jansz, 1608.
The Everyday Urban Fabric:
The Timber House

## S. 24

23
1.04
57
58
59
57. Siena. Plan of the Campo.
58. Siena with medieval tower houses.
59. Siena. General plan of Siena centre, its functional division in three neighborhoods (terzi) and the different contradas.
The City-State:
Public Spaces and Buildings

## S. 25

24
1.04
60
60. Florence. Catena view, ca. 1470.
The City-State:
Public Spaces and Buildings

## S. 26

25
1.04
61
62
63
64
61. Florence. Contemporary aerial view with Roman grid pattern.
62. Florence. Axonometry through a ‘Casa Torre’.
63. Florence. Zocchi plan with a clear indication of public spaces, 1754.
64. Florence. Superimposition of Roman grid plan with medieval plan.
The City-State:
Housing Patterns in Evolution

## S. 27

26
1.04
65
66
67
65. Bern. Urban plan with indication of the single houses and allotments. ca. 1549
66. Map of Zähringer cities. ca. 1200
67. Bern. The Martkgassr today.
Zähringer Cities:
Housing Patterns in Evolution

## S. 28

27
1.04
68
69
68. Bern. Cadaster plan. 12th century.
69. Bern. Evolution of built fabric and open space between the 12th and 18th century.
Zähringer Cities:
Housing Patterns in Evolution
/Tradin
LAdded

## S. 29

28
1.04
Further reading:
Gutkind, E A. International History of City Development: 
Urban Development in Central Europe. London: Collier-
Macmillan, 1964.
Collis, John. Oppida: Earliest Towns North of the Alps. 
Sheffield, UK: Department
of Prehistory and Archaeology, University of Sheffield, 
1984.
Frugoni, Chiara, Arsenio Frugoni, and William McCuaig. A Day in a Medieval City. Chicago: The University 
of Chicago Press, 2006.
Miller, Edward, and John Hatcher. Medieval England: 
Towns, Commerce, and
Crafts, 1086–1348. London and New York: Longman, 
1995. 
Pirenne, Henri, and Michael McCormick. Medieval Cities: Their Origins and the Revival of Trade. Princeton, 
N.J: Princeton Unversity Press, 2014
Pounds, Norman J. G. The Medieval City. Westport, 
Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 2005.
Rorig, Fritz. The Medieval Town. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1967.
Saalman, Howard. Medieval Cities. New York: G. Braziller, 1987.
Sources Images:
Broadbent, Geoffrey. Emerging Concepts in Urban Space 
Design. London: Taylor & Francis, 2005.
Pounds, Norman J. G. The Medieval City. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 2005.
Saalman, Howard. Medieval Cities. New York: G. Braziller, 
1987.
Dates and Facts
Spread of monasticism in Europe 
 
 
 
4th century onwards
Arab expansion to Near East, North Africa and Europe 634 - 808
Viking invasions 
 
 
 
 
 
793 - 1066
Founding Bologna University 
 
 
 
 
1088
First Crusade 
 
 
 
 
 
1096 - 1099
Hanseatic League initiated 
 
 
 
 
1159
