---
titel: "B1.07-SCRIPT"
quelle: "Studium Andrin (HSLU/ETH)"
datei: "B1.07-SCRIPT.pdf"
seiten: 29
ocr-seiten: 0
tags: [bauwissen, vorlesung]
---

# B1.07-SCRIPT

## S. 2

1
1.07
The City of Labour: 
Company Towns as 
Cross-Cultural Phenomenon
In his 1845 publication The Condition of the Working 
Class in England (Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in 
England) Friedrich Engels depicted a new reality that had 
emerged in the second half of the 18th and the first part 
of the 19th century. Following the invention of the steam 
engine and its implementation in industry and transport, 
the so-called ‘Industrial Revolution’ started. This not only 
forged the progress of faster transport of people and 
goods between cities and countries, but also drastically 
changed the way that work was organized and propelled 
a new expansion of cities. Engels, however, illustrated 
that the Industrial Revolution was not only a harbinger of 
progress, but also worsened the condition of workers. He 
illustrated that in large industrial cities such as Manchester 
and Liverpool, mortality from disease was four times 
that in the surrounding countryside, and mortality from 
convulsions was ten times as high.
These aggravating conditions of the laboring class would 
provoke reactions with thinkers and designers, who 
would start to reflect from various angles upon the norms 
and forms of ‘the city of labor’. Their approaches can 
generally be divided in three categories. A first group 
of architects and thinkers can be labelled as ‘radical 
utopians’, because they maintained that there was no 
way out of the crisis and that human civilization had to 
be built from the very beginning somewhere out of the 
industrial society. Thinkers like Charles Fourier and Robert 
Owen preferred to conceive a radically new foundation 
for ideal social and environmental conditions. 
A second group of thinkers and designers believed in 
the possible improvement of social and environmental 
conditions through legislation and large-scale public 
works. The French Georges-Eugène Haussmann is an 
example of this approach. As from 1853 he launched 
a large project of public works in Paris, which aimed 
to the end of absolute liberalism and „laissez faire” in 
order to control development, as a common interest. 
Hausmmann attempted to create a new model for the city 
and to demonstrate, that the city was not condemned to 
death – as an opposition to the anti-urban ideology of 
the social utopias. Haussmann’s approach would mark 
the beginning of an urban tradition of transformation of 
existing cities.
A third reaction to the industrial revolution and its effects 
on the architecture of the city came from thinkers like 
William Morris and John Ruskin. They located the 
ground of the bad condition of the laboring classes in the 
alienation of the worker from the result of his work and 
maintained that engines and mass production should 
play only a subordinated role. The ethics and aesthetics of 
handicraft represented in their view the remedy from the 
misery of the industrial society and the mass production. 
Their model of the city of labor was based on the believe 
in the continuity of tradition and the predominance of 
handicrafts.

## S. 3

2
1.07
18th & 19th Century Scientific and Technological Advancement
1
2
3
4
invention of engines
machines such as => spinning jenny 
idea of factory! mass production
goods that are being transported => already very dense network at beginnining of 19. century

## S. 4

3
1.07
Explosive Urban Growth
5
1. Watt, James. Rotative steam engine with sun-andplanet gear. 1788. 
2. Blenkinsop, John. Salamanca Locomotive. 1812. 
3. Dobbin, John. Opening of the First Public Railway - 
the Stockton and Darlington. 1825. 
4. Development of the Railway and Telegraph 
network in middle Europe, until the middle of 19th 
century.
5. Doré, Gustave. London: A Pilgrimage. 1872. 
(“Over London by Rail”)
bad working conditions
miasma theory diseases
such as cholera, chlamydia, or black death

## S. 5

4
1.07
Radical Utopianism
The Ideal Workers’ Town 
6
8
9
7
6. Arc-et-Senans, The Saline Royale of Chaux by Claude-Nicolas Ledoux, 1779.
General map of the surroundings of the Saline with 
the forest to the North and the river to the South. In 
the city we find a parish church (A), a court house (B), 
town hall (C) as well as collective (D) and individual 
housing (E) and public baths (I). 
7. Arc-et-Senans, The Saline Royale of Chaux by Claude-Nicolas Ledoux, 1779.
First town plan. All buildings on the edges of an immense square, and linked to each other by porticoes. 
Working and living buildings were part of a single 
urban form.
8. Arc-et-Senans, The Saline Royale of Chaux by Claude-Nicolas Ledoux, 1779.
9. Arc-et-Senans, Model of The Saline Royale of 
Chaux by Claude-Nicolas Ledoux, 1779. The Church 
(right), the Director’s House (middle) and the Courth 
House (left) as elements that order the city.
10./11. Arc-et-Senans, The Saline Royale of Chaux 
by Claude-Nicolas Ledoux, 1779. Aerial view and plan 
with the entrance building and the quarters for workers 
in the periphery of the town. At the center Ledoux positioned the house of the director, the chapel and the 
saltworks, two buildings of 80 meters long with drying 
ovens, the heating pots and the salt stores.
12./13. Arc-et-Senans, The Saline Royale of Chaux 
by Claude-Nicolas Ledoux, 1779. Entrance building 
(bottom) and directors house with one of the saltworks 
(top).
this is what got realised , director house, salting, garden and housing

## S. 6

5
1.07
Radical Utopianism
The Ideal Workers’ Town 
10
12
13
11
collective hoousing and garden
salting house
salting house
house of 
director
Certain kind of presence and dignity
for represenational buildings
director could watch everyone
visually controlled, regime of control => 
panoptikum like prison
one side, better for workers, more 
dignity but on other side, controlled and 
watched environments for workers

## S. 7

6
1.07
Radical Utopianism
The Utopian Socialists: New Cities as Paths to Social Change
14
17
15
16
14. Robert Owen (1771-1858), by Brooke, William Henry, 1834.
15. New Lanark Mills, Scotland, 1779. Robert Owen modernized the mill and improve both the working and social conditions of his workers, by building an elementary school and kintergarden. 
16. New Lanark Mills, Scotland, 1779. Aerial view of the working and living complex.
17. New Lanark Mills, Scotland, 1779. Classroom in the elementary school.
18. New Harmony, Indiana (United States). Birdseye view with school, library, place for worship, public kitchen etc. in the center. By Robert Owen, 
1824.
19. Owen, Robert. A View & Plan of the Villages of Unity & Mutual Co-Operation. 1817.
cotton mills => make it modern! => collective provisions => kindergarten, kita, elementary schools
being intruced in mills for worker familys.

## S. 8

7
1.07
Radical Utopianism
The Utopian Socialists: New Cities as Paths to Social Change
18
19
representation of harmony => palace is model

## S. 9

8
1.07
Radical Utopianism
The Utopian Socialists: New Cities as Paths to Social Change
20
21
territorial formations => live and work together

## S. 10

9
1.07
Radical Utopianism
The Utopian Socialists: New Cities as Paths to Social Change
22
23
20. New Harmony, Indiana (United States) by Robert Owen, 1824. An open 
green space in the core as a remedy from the chaos of the industrial society.
21. New Harmony, Indiana (United States) by Robert Owen, 1824. Detailled explanation of the various components of the new communities of 2000 persons.
22. Charles Fourier (1772-1837), table of gradual social development of human 
being, illustrating the believe in the possibility of social reform.
23. Phalanstère, aerial view of industrial and rural buildings following the principles of Charles Fourier, 1847.
land is owned by community => joind stock company and leasing land and buildings => idea of principles and plans robert owen, 1841
property in hands of people => what urban design ﬁts this style of living
dystopian socialists 
=> charles fourier
phalanxes => future of labor classes, social grouping => military
phalansteries => new urban units

## S. 11

10
1.07
Radical Utopianism
The Utopian Socialists: New Cities as Paths to Social Change
24
25
26
27
D

## S. 12

11
1.07
Radical Utopianism
The Utopian Socialists: New Cities as Paths to Social Change
28
29
24. Phalanstère, aerial view of new workers settlement model following the 
principles of Charles Fourier, 1847.
25. Phalanstère for 400 families and its surroundings as composed by Henri 
Fugère following the principles of Charles Fourier, 1847.
26. Phalanstère, general plan with the main building, the so-called ‘Palais d’Habitation’ in the middle, 1847. Elements of the plan are (A) main square, (B) winter garden with greenhouses, (C) and (D) courtyards with trees and fountains, (F) 
theater, (G) church, (H), (I ) and (J) workshops and (K) barns.
27. Phalanstère, perspective of the main buildings following the principles of 
Charles Fourier, 1847.
28. Guise, Familistère as developed by Jean-Baptiste André Godin, 1859. Article presenting the Familistère as a solution to the workers question.
29. Guise, Familistère as developed by Jean-Baptiste André Godin, 1859. Plan 
as composed of several buildings with collective housing.
A: interior courtyards
a: entrance
b: staircases 
c: passage on all floors
d: galleries for circulation and 
exchange
e: lavatories 
f: fountains on all floors
g: trapdoor
h: bath-rooms and showers
i: shops
j: nursery
k: crib rooms and maids’ beds
l: walkway
m: office
n: nursery lavatories
o: room for the first gymnastic 
exercises of kids (2-4 years old)
p: room for rest and first lessons 
for kids older than 4 years
based on principles of fourirer

## S. 13

12
1.07
Radical Utopianism
The Utopian Socialists: New Cities as Paths to Social Change
30
31 
32
30. Guise, Familistère and the nearby Manufacture as developed by Godin, 1859.
31. Guise. The Familistère, sanitary facilities in the vicinity of the river. As developed by Godin, 1859.
32. Guise. The Familistère, plan of the Theatre. As developed by Godin, 1859.
33.-36. Guise, Familistère as developed by Godin, 1859. Plan, section and views of the living quarters.

## S. 14

13
1.07
Radical Utopianism
The Utopian Socialists: New Cities as Paths to Social Change
33
34
35
36
small dwelling cells, min appartements, collectivised activities such as cooking

## S. 15

14
1.07
Radical Utopianism
The Utopian Socialists: New Cities as Paths to Social Change
37
38
40
39

## S. 16

15
1.07
Radical Utopianism
The Utopian Socialists: New Cities as Paths to Social Change
41
43
42
37.-43. Guise. The Familistère, photographs of the various social, education and 
cultural activities. As developed by Jean-Baptiste André Godin, 1859.

## S. 17

16
1.07
Radical Utopianism
The Utopian Socialists: New Cities as Paths to Social Change
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
44.-50. Boston. Brook Farm. Territory, general layout and photographs. As 
developed by George Ripley, 1841-1847.

## S. 18

17
1.07
Reform 
Working-Class Housing: Early Prototypes in Paris and London, 1840s–1850s
51
52
51. London. Hector Gavin, Sanitary Ramblings, 1848.
52. London. Model Houses for Four Families. By Henry Roberts at the Great Exhibition of 1851.
new way of living for working class

## S. 19

18
1.07
53
54
55
53-55. Paris. Cité Napoléon, rue du Rochechouart. Marie-Gabriel Veugny, 1851.
Reform 
Working-Class Housing: Early Prototypes in Paris and London, 1840s–1850s
new sort of housing type => economic and quality living => new living type => parisian block system
in middle => courtyard
reinterpretation of familistere => but organised for city paris
covered outdoor space

## S. 20

19
1.07
Reform
Regulating the Existing City: The Project of Haussmann
56
57
56. The Baron Haussmann (1809-1891) in Le Journal Illustré, 1868.
57. Paris. Avenue de l’Opéra. 1872. By Camille Pissaro, 1898.
redeﬁning paris into how we know it today

## S. 21

20
1.07
Reform
Regulating the Existing City: The Project of Haussmann
58
58. Paris, Urban plan with indication of the different 
interventions proposed by Haussmann, 1865.
59. Paris, section through a typical Parisian apartment block, 1852.
60. Paris, the long, straight avenues cut into the 
existing urban fabric, Baron Haussmann, pictured 
here around 1870.
61. Paris, A drawing of the destruction of Paris 
under Haussmann’s command, around 1860.
changing paris , changing from palimpsest style 
extension to a clear grid in paris

## S. 22

21
1.07
Reform
Regulating the Existing City: The Project of Haussmann
59
60
61

## S. 23

22
1.07
Reform
Regulating the Existing City: The Project of Haussmann
62
63
64
62. Paris, Photograph of the destruction of Paris under Haussmann’s command, around 1860.
63. Paris, Aerial view centring on the Étoile area that Haussmann redesigned.
64. Paris, view of the new housing blocks as introduced by Haussmann.
6 ﬂoor system

## S. 24

23
1.07
Reform
Regulating the Existing City: The Project of Haussmann
65
66
65. Paris, analysis of the principle of shared courtyards in the new housing blocks as introduced by Haussmann.
66. Paris, analysis of the principles of the new housing blocks as introduced by Haussmann.

## S. 25

24
1.07
Reform
Regulating the Existing City: The Project of Haussmann
67
68
67. Paris, analysis of the principle of density introduced by new housing blocks by Haussmann.
68. Paris, analysis of the urban fabric that was redesigned by Haussmann.

## S. 26

25
1.07
Reform
Regulating the Existing City: The Project of Haussmann
69
70
69. Paris, analysis of the aesthetic principles of the facades of the new housing blocks as introduced by Haussmann.
70. Paris, analysis of the new urban elements introduced by Haussmann.

## S. 27

26
1.07
Continuity of Tradition
News from Nowhere: The Small Town and the Stones of Venice
71. William Morris. News from Nowhere. 1890.
72. John Ruskin.The Stones of Venice. 1851.
71
72

## S. 28

27
1.07
Continuity of Tradition
News from Nowhere: The Small Town and the Stones of Venice
73. Ruskin Commonwealth Association near Tennessee City. 1894-96. View of the Ruskin Colony in Ruskin, Tennessee. Several buildings are identified 
on the image, including the boys‘ dormitory (a), two other dormitories (b and c), the store (z), the laundry (y), and Geta‘s Room (x).
74. Ruskin Commonwealth Association near Tennessee City. 1894-96.
73
74

## S. 29

28
1.07
Further reading:
Bollerey, Franziska. Architekturkonzeption Der Utopischen Sozialisten: Alternative 
Planung Und Architektur Für Den Gesellschaftlichen Prozess. Berlin: Ernst & Sohn, 
1991.
Choay, Françoise. The Modern City: Planning in the 19th Century. New York: G. 
Braziller, 1989
Kirkland, Stephane. Paris Reborn: Napolóen Iii, Baron Haussmann, and the Quest 
to Rebuild a Modern City. New York: Picador, 2014.
Saalman, Howard. Haussmann: Paris Transformed. New York: G. Braziller, 1971.
Sutcliffe, Anthony. Paris: An Architectural History. New Haven: Yale University Press, 
1993.
Sources Images:
Bollerey, Franziska. Architekturkonzeption Der Utopischen Sozialisten: Alternative Planung Und Architektur Für Den Gesellschaftlichen Prozess. Berlin: Ernst & Sohn, 1991.
Choay, Françoise. The Modern City: Planning in the 19th Century. New York: G. Braziller, 1989
Saalman, Howard. Haussmann: Paris Transformed. New York: 
G. Braziller, 1971.
Wikimedia Commons
Dates and Facts
First working engine 
 
 
 
 
 
1712
First full-scale working railway steam locomotive 
 
1804
New Harmony by Robert Owen 
 
 
 
1824 
Engels, The Condition of the Working Class in England 
 
1845
Cité Napoléon by Marie-Gabriel Veugny 
 
1851
Model Houses for Four Families by Henry Roberts 
1851
Haussmann, Prefect of Seine 
 
 
 
 
1853-1870
Familistère by Godin 
 
 
 
 
 
1859
