---
titel: "B1.06-SCRIPT"
quelle: "Studium Andrin (HSLU/ETH)"
datei: "B1.06-SCRIPT.pdf"
seiten: 35
ocr-seiten: 0
tags: [bauwissen, vorlesung]
---

# B1.06-SCRIPT

## S. 2

2
1.06
Of Absolutism and 
Enlightenment: 
The Norms and Forms of the
Baroque City
The Baroque period is most often associated with a 
highly ornate and often extravagant style of architecture, art and music that flourished in Europe from the 
early 17th until the mid-18th century. In this era religion 
played a very important role. From the mid 16th century onward a schism was initiated in Western Christianity by Martin Luther, Huldrych Zwingli, John Calvin 
and other Protestant reformers. This provoked a Bildersturm, in which Catholic art in churches and public 
spaces was destroyed by mass actions of Protestants 
in cities like Zurich (1523), Copenhagen (1530), Münster (1534) and Geneva (1535). The Protestant Reformation would soon provoke Counter-Reformation, 
initiated to preserve the power, influence and material 
wealth of the Catholic Church. Religious wars were 
numerous and culminated in the Thirty Years‘ War 
(1618-1648), which not only killed large parts of the 
population of a country like Germany but also initiated 
migratory moves across Europe.
Following the explorations of the 16th century by powers like Spain and Portugal, colonial empires would 
be firmly conquered and established during the 17th 
century. The new territories gave Europe access to 
many new resources: land, precious metals and new 
products such as coffee and tobacco. It was not until 
the late 17th century that commercial and industrial 
profits from trade with Asia and the Americas became 
visible. By this time the benefits resulting from overseas trade and investment had become more widely diffused across Europe, accruing principally to the 
Dutch Republic, followed closely by England and, later, 
France. As the world economy expanded the Americas, Europe and the Far East became inextricably 
linked through trade. The countries that gained most 
from this economic expansion were nation-states such 
as France and England, which developed a strong 
central government alongside mercantilist policies. 
Against this background, baroque urban design would 
become a matter that belonged almost exclusively to 
the power elites. Popes, nobility, kings and politicians 
commissioned new urban interventions to celebrate 
their wealth and power. Baroque urbanism equals often the ‚grand gesture‘; it introduces a previously unknown grandeur and scale into the midst of the urban 
fabric. Urban design becomes also a matter of the 
theatrical; ruling powers use the urban stage to show 
themselves off, while architects mirror the ‘grandeur’ of 
their patrons. Characteristic for Baroque urban design 
is that the Renaissance approach Ideal Cities are left in 
favor of a more architectural and small-scale approach 
of urban design. The design of the city is conceived 
through architectural projects that shape the urban environment.
In the 17th century Baroque urban design extends its 
outreach beyond the city borders, illustrating the omnipresence of the political power in the entire territory. 
Urban spaces, buildings, gardens, squares are no longer autonomous and juxtaposed precincts but are subordinated to dominant systems of axes cutting across 
the urban territory and linking the various urban elements. New urban figures such as the Royal Squares, 
the boulevard and the ordonnances would emerge in 
the city as a result of this absolutist approach to the 
urban fabric. With the foundation of cities like St. Petersburg there is a rediscovery of urban totality, but this 
is not created by means of a rational plan but rather by 
way of the perspective and movement axes. 
Baroque urban design would also raise interest in the 
‘new world’ where new settlement forms had to be invented. Time and time again, there was a large reliance 
on architecture to structure and shape the city. As the 
urban design for Washington exemplifies, there was a 
strong conviction that buildings were first made and 
moulded by the world around them and subsequently 
would begin to act on their surroundings. This action 
and reaction place individual buildings into a creative 
relationship with the Baroque city as a whole.

## S. 3

3
1.06
Architecture as Project for the City: 
Complementing and Perfecting Urban Space
1
2
3
4
Religion
Territories
church symbolies
are being
↑
removed

## S. 4

4
1.06
Architecture as Project for the City: 
Complementing and Perfecting Urban Space
1. Map of the Progress of the Reformation in Western and Central Europe, 1560.
2. The looting of the Churches of Lyon by Antoine Caron in 
1562.
3. Map of the Thirty Years War, a complex of wars which combined dynastic and strategic conflict with religious struggles, the 
latter breaking out both within and between states, 1618-1648.
4. Bildsturm or Beeldenstorm, painting by Dirck van Delen, 
1630.
5. Colonization and the Spanish, Portuguese, French, British 
and Dutch empires in 1660.
6. The French colonial empire after 1534 (light blue) and after 
1830 (dark blue).
7. The British colonial empire at its territorial peak in 1912.
5
6
7

## S. 5

5
1.06
8
9
8.+9. Rome, San Carlo alle Quatttro Fontane by Francesco Borromini 1662-1667. One of the main exponents of Italian Baroque architecture with an important effect on urban space.
10.+11. Rome, Sant‘Agnese in Agone Church by Borromini, 1652-1672. Plan.
12. Rome, Piazza Navona with Sant‘Agnese in Agone Church by Borromini. Drawing by Piranesi, 1652-1672
Architecture as Project for the City: 
Complementing and Perfecting Urban Space
Barock urban Design - Architecture
as part of City
Fountain
added
Adding
area to the city
to city
↑1.
way of showing
power
-
By an building , improving whole city-o idea !
Tag
grand gestore
in city

## S. 6

6
1.06
10
12
11
Architecture as Project for the City: 
Complementing and Perfecting Urban Space
& receiving movement in facade
serving the urban
↳a central point
space
-> Architecture
Connected
contributes to
urban space

## S. 7

7
1.06
Architecture as Project for the City: 
Complementing and Perfecting Urban Space
13
14
15
13. Rome, Piazza Del Campidoglio by Michelangelo, 1540 -1564. General plan of the square and the buildings.
14. Rome, Piazza Del Campidoglio by Michelangelo, 1540 -1564. Birdseye view and architectural details.
15. Rome, Piazza Del Campidoglio with Equestrian statue of Marcus Aureliius, ca. 1850-70.
Idea of centrality - grandios ! Bid effect

## S. 8

8
1.06
Architecture as Project for the City: 
Complementing and Perfecting Urban Space
17
16
18
16. Rome, Piazza Del Campidoglio. Engraving by Etienne Dupérac, 1568
17. Rome, Piazza Del Campidoglio. Aerial view.
18. Rome, The Palazzo Senatorio in the 14th century.

## S. 9

9
1.06
The Territorial City: 
Expanding the Urban Confines
19
20
21
22
Tobeyond city
Reform and
transform
to
Romeconnect
LoRome taspectace
bevisual

## S. 10

10
1.06
The Territorial City: 
Expanding the Urban Confines
24
23
19. Pope Sixtus V with various of his urban interventions, by 
Franciscum Zannetum, 1589
20. The Seven Churches of Rome , engraving by Antoine Lafrery, 1575.
21. Rome, territorial plan developed under Pope Sixtus V, by 
Gian Francesco Bordini,1585-1590
22. Rome, Strada Felice, engraving by Battista Falda, 1670.
23. Rome, plan of Baroque city by Giambattista Nolli, 1748.
24. Rome, Piazza del Popolo, Engaving by Giuseppe Vasi 1752
Monument to monument !
Network-Transportation
,Infrastructure
Impression
Baroc
a
Design!

## S. 11

11
1.06
The City as Symbol of Absolutism: 
Of Squares, Boulevards and Ordonnances
25
26
27
25. Paris, Opening Ceremony of the Place Royal by Claude 
Chastillon, 1612.
26. Paris, Place Royale with its uniform architecture and the 
Statue of Louis XIII, engraving by Pierre Aveline, 1639.
27. Paris, Place Royale in its urban context, by Baptist Jean 
Androuet du Cerceau, 1604-1610.

## S. 12

12
1.06
The City as Symbol of Absolutism: 
Of Squares, Boulevards and Ordonnances
28
29
28. Paris, Figure-ground plan with the Place Royale in its urban context.
29. Paris, Plan with indication of public spaces by Pierre Patte, 1765.
Gamed
inside
squares
-servers of political leading
Figures
- Military
, King
L
↳squares symbolise their power
A that time
not
well
...
Squere
implies
- >capacity to intervene and
reordercity

## S. 13

13
1.06
30
31
30.+31. Paris, rue de Castiglione with its ordinances, 1900/2000. Photograph in the direction of 
Place Vendôme.
The City as Symbol of Absolutism: 
Of Squares, Boulevards and Ordonnances
e
Uniform
Architecture
o Rhythm

## S. 14

14
1.06
The City as Symbol of Absolutism: 
Of Squares, Boulevards and Ordonnances
32
33
32 Paris, Place Dauphine, 1722.
33. Paris, Place Dauphine In its urban context with the Pont Neuf, 1722.

## S. 15

15
1.06
34
35
36
34./ 35. Paris, Cours de la Reine, commissioned by Maria de Medici, 1616.
36. Paris, Urban Tissue with Place de Vendome and boulevard, Plan de Turgot, 1734-1739.
The City as Symbol of Absolutism: 
Of Squares, Boulevards and Ordonnances
Boulevard
, cours
↑
you represent yourself in
cours
-

## S. 16

16
1.06
London Squares:
1600-1800
37. System of common lands enclosure in England. 12th-19th centuries.
38. London. Christopher Wren, Plan for the expansion of London after the Great Fire of 1666.
37
38

## S. 17

17
1.06
London Squares:
1600-1800
39. London. Town Squares, 1600-1800
40a. London. Squares in the West End. ca. 1800.
40b. London. Cavendish square. Contemporary image.
39
40a
40b
Agriculture
- ~ to urban territory
Fenced public
spaces!anly when
Not representation of King
, but
Estate political
powers
↑you
havekey-roupeour

## S. 18

18
1.06
41
42
41. The founding of St. Petersburg by Peter 
the Great in 1703, by Alexander von Kotzebue.
42. St. Petersburg, Urban plan with indication 
of large urban ensembles, 1834.
43. St. Petersburg, View of Palace Embankment from the Peter and Paul Fortress, by 
Fyodor Alekseev, 1794.
44. St. Petersburg, Menshikov Palace built 
by Italian architects Giovanni Maria Fontana, 
and, later, German architect Gottfried Johann 
Schädel. Opened in 1711.
45. St. Petersburg, The Winter Palace, built 
1754-1762 by order of Empress Elisabeth I of 
Russia, designed by Bartolomeo Rastrelli.
Cities of Parts: 
Rome and Saint Petersburg
should be a grand city!
Started new city
, Kanal system like amsterdam ,
N
Term

## S. 19

19
1.06
Cities of Parts: 
Rome and Saint Petersburg
43
45
44
Italian
fashioned
Architecture

## S. 20

20
1.06
46
Cities of Parts: 
Rome and Saint Petersburg

## S. 21

21
1.06
Cities of Parts: 
Rome and Saint Petersburg
47
48
49
46. St. Petersburg, View of the Nevsky Prospekt with Anichkov Palace and the 
mansion of Shuvalov. Unknown artist, second half of the 18th century. 
47. St Petersburg, View of the Admirality shipyard by A. Zbov, 1917.
48./49. St Petersburg, Contemporary view of the Admirality.

## S. 22

22
1.06
Cities of Parts: 
Rome and Saint Petersburg
50
52
53
51
50. St. Petersburg, Aerial view of the Palace Square towards the Winter Palace.
51. St. Petersburg, General Staff Building, by architect 
K. I. Rossi, 1820-1830. The project revolved around the 
architect’s idea to unite two separate buildings with a triumphal arch, a monument to Russia’s victory in the war 
of 1812.
52. St. Petersburg, Aerial view of the Palace Square, between the Winter Palace (bottom) and the Building of the 
General Staff (top).
53. St. Petersburg, under Alexander I and Nicholas I, was 
transformed into a grand spatial composition of related 
ensembles.
small + large scale
and the experience of it

## S. 23

23
1.06
Cities of Parts: 
Rome and Saint Petersburg
54
55
54. Rome, St. Peter’s’ square before building the colonnades, panorama view by Israel Silvestre, 1641.
55. Rome, St. Peter’s’ square before building the colonnades, painting by Viviano Codazzi, 1630.
Vatikan

## S. 24

24
1.06
Cities of Parts and Wholes: 
Rome and Saint Petersburg
56
57
58
56. Rome, Plan of the old Vatican by Carlo 
Fontana, Il Tempio Vaticano e la sua origine, 
Roma, 1694.
57. Rome, early sketch of public space in 
front of St. Peter.
58. Rome, Placement of obelisk on St. Peters 
square by Domenico Fontana, in collaboration 
with Giacomo della Porta, placed an obelisk 
on St. Peters square, 1568.
↓/
cameerstrom Egy

## S. 25

25
1.06
Cities of Parts and Wholes: 
Rome and Saint Petersburg
59
60
61
59./60. Rome, Aerial view of St Peters Square by Gian Lorenzo Bernini, 
1656-1667.
61. Rome, Details of St Peters Square 
by Gian Lorenzo Bernini, 1656-1667.
62. Rome, Details of St Peters Square 
by Gian Lorenzo Bernini, 1656-1667.
63. Rome, Details of St Peters Square, 
engraving by Giovanni Battista Nolli, 
1748.
64. Rome, St Peters Square, with 
narrow street leading to square.
via della conzilliazone
loconnecting
areet
toriver

## S. 26

26
1.06
Cities of Parts and Wholes: 
Rome and Saint Petersburg
62
63
64
auslquare
-

## S. 27

27
1.06
Cities of Parts and Wholes: 
Rome and Saint Petersburg
65
66
67
68
65. Rome, St Peters Square, Doric colonnades and 
gates by Gian Lorenzo Bernini, 1656-1667.
66. Rome, St Peters Square, geometric principles 
by Gian Lorenzo Bernini, 1656-1667.
67./68. Rome, St Peters Square, Doric colonnades 
by Gian Lorenzo Bernini, 1656-1667.
69. Rome, St Peters Square, detail of Doric colonnades by Gian Lorenzo Bernini, 1656-1667.
70./71. Rome, Cross section and façade of St Peters Square and St Peters Basilica.
asehoingwalk

## S. 28

28
1.06
Cities of Parts and Wholes: 
Rome and Saint Petersburg
69
70
71
creative
fot
sequenceseffect!
-apered form
Barack
to make Basilica
okbigar
-grandgesture
of
Es
LAscending sections

## S. 29

29
1.06
Cities of Parts and Wholes: 
Rome and Saint Petersburg
72
73
72. Rome, Aerial view of Piazza del Popolo, Carlo Rainaldi with Bernini and Carlo Fontana, 1661.
73. View of Rome and the Piazza del Popolo by Gaspar Van Wittel, 1778.
Similar--3-axwen
14
O
Idea to create entrance point
I
traue
grandedie
-

## S. 30

30
1.06
74
75a
75b
Cities of Parts and Wholes: 
Rome and Saint Petersburg
74. Rome, Detail of the Piazza del Popolo, Engraving by Giovanni Battista Nolli, 1748.
75a. Rome, Porta del Popolo, Carlo Rainaldi with Bernini and Carlo Fontana, 1661.
75b. Rome. Santa Maria dei Miracoli (west) and Santa Maria di Monte Santo (east), Carlo Rainaldi, 1661.

## S. 31

31
1.06
Exporting the Baroque City:
Washington
76
77
76. Portrait of George Washington (1732–1799) by Gilbert Stuart, 1797.
77. Washington, Plan of the city intended for the permanent seat of the government of the United States, by Pierre L’Enfant, 1791.

## S. 32

32
1.06
Exporting the Baroque City:
Washington
78
79
80
78. Washington before the interventions of Pierre L’Enfant.
79. Washington, L‘Enfant Plan of Washington Superimposed on the Rectangular System From which He Worked 
80. Washington, survey of Topography by Pierre L’Enfant, 1791.
Highest point of topography
↳Important
buildings
democracy
=
travel
& grid for basicdiagon
esaseeu points
Street system

## S. 33

33
1.06
Exporting the Baroque City:
Washington
81
82
83
81. Washington, Panoramic View of the Washington city, 1852.
82. Washington, Map Showing the Route of the Canal System in front of Jenkins Hill, 1815.
83. Washington, View of the President’s House, William Strickland, 1814.
visual connections

## S. 34

34
1.06
Exporting the Baroque City:
Washington
84
86
85
84. Washington, View of L’Enfant’s Vision for the City’s Canals. Lithography from 1852.
85. Washington, Concept Drawing of L’Enfant’s Vision for the City’s Canals, Elbert Peets, 1791.
86. Washington, Plan of L’Enfant’s Vision for the City’s Canals, 1791.
political and economical power(canal
↳Representation

## S. 35

35
1.06
Further reading:
Burroughs, Charles. “Absolutism and the Rhetoric of Topography: Streets in the Rome of Sixtus V”, in: Zeynep Çelik, Diane Favro und 
Richard Ingersoll (Hg.), Streets: Critical Perspectives on Public Space, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1994, 189–202.
Cohen, Gary B, and Franz A. J. Szabo. Embodiments of Power: Building Baroque Cities in Europe. New York: Berghahn Books, 2008. 
Habel, Dorothy M. „when All of Rome Was Under Construction“: The Building Process in Baroque Rome. University Park, Pa: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2013
Lynch, Patrick. The Theatricality of the Baroque City: The Zwinger and Dresden. Saarbrücken: VDM Verlag Dr. Müller, 2011.
Mayernik, David, “The Baroque City”, in: John D. Lyons The Oxford Handbook of the Baroque, 2018. Internet resource.
Millon, Henry A. The Triumph of the Baroque: Architecture in Europe, 1600-1750. New York: Rizzoli, 1999. 
Zamora, Lois P, and Monika Kaup. Baroque New Worlds: Representation, Transculturation, Counterconquest. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2010. 
Zucker, Paul. „Space and Movement in High Baroque City Planning.“ Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians / Society of Architectural Historians. (1955): 8-13. 
Sources Images:
Bacon, Edmund N. Design of Cities. London: Thames and 
Hudson, 1995
Benevolo, Leonardo, The European City. Oxford, UK: Blackwell, 
2010.
Borsi, Franco. Bernini. New York: Rizzoli, 1985.
Fletcher, Banister, and Banister Fletcher. A History of Architecture on the Comparative Method. United States: Nabu Press, 
2012.
Nolli, Giovanni B. Nuova Pianta Di Roma. Rome, 1748.
Wikimedia Commons
Dates and Facts
Martin Luther, ninety-five theses 
 
 
1517
Pope Sixtus V, Plan for Rome 
 
 
 
1585 - 1590
Paris, Inauguration Place Royal 
 
1612
Thirty Years‘ War 
 
 
 
 
1618 - 1648 
Rome, St Peters Square by Bernini 
 
 
1656 - 1667
St. Petersburg, foundation by Peter the Great 
1703
Washington, plan by L’Enfant 
 
 
 
1791 
networking
, access
↓
interlativne
focuspoints
Representation
bigger parts
and grand gestores
I
Barock urban Design
small parts affect
↳sequence
= power of urban Desig
in Eurepe and Washingtes
La Democratic grid
City
for powerfuls
