---
titel: "B1.02-SCRIPT"
quelle: "Studium Andrin (HSLU/ETH)"
datei: "B1.02-SCRIPT.pdf"
seiten: 22
ocr-seiten: 0
tags: [bauwissen, vorlesung]
---

# B1.02-SCRIPT

## S. 2

2
1.02
Of Rituals, Water and Mud: 
The Urban Revolution in 
Mesopotamia and the Indus
Valley
‘An Urban Revolution’ that is how geographer Gordon Childe described the vast changes that arose independently in six parts of the world as from the 9th 
century BCE onwards. Technological changes and the 
domestication of wild plants and animals forged in various regions a new way of life that was characterized by sedentism and population growth. Through a 
combination of migration and trade this new ‘modus 
vivendi’ expanded and developed into large complex 
social and cultural systems characterized by political 
organization, class inequalities and the emergence of 
a new artefact in the territory: the city.
The settlements of Göbekli Tepe and Çatal Hüyük in 
nowadays Turkey cannot be qualified as full-fledged 
cities, but they illustrate how innovative proto-urban 
artefacts emerged that were organized according 
to new principles. Göbekli Tepe exemplifies how the 
new sedentary way of life brought a new conception 
of time, which was expressed in the prominence of 
religious buildings in the organization of the city. Çatal 
Hüyük, at the time the most complex and largest settlement of Southwest Asia, emerged from the trade in 
the most sought after commodity of the Neolithic period: obsidian. The pattern of the town, a dense fabric of 
rectangular houses without streets and with circulation 
on the roofs, illustrates the emergence of new social 
arrangements.
As Uruk (ca. 3000 BC) and Ur (ca. 2100 BC) demonstrate, by ca. 2350 BCE cities were already firmly established as centres of social, economic and political 
life in southern Mesopotamia. Owned by the gods, 
administered for them by kings, Sumerian cities controlled regional agriculture and water supplies, promoted crafts, and participated in long-distance trade that 
ensured the provision of raw materials unavailable locally. Complexes of religious buildings attributed to the 
titular deity functioned originally as the religious, administrative and economic centre. In these centres maps 
of geographic and urban space were produced in the 
form of line drawings on clay tables, which soon would 
become the convention for representing architecture 
and the city. Cities as Uruk and Ur saw the development of new building techniques for the construction 
of monumental architecture, but also of religious art 
and of cuneiform writing to record economic data as 
well as myths, events and rituals.
The period around 2500 BCE was also characterized 
by prosperity and expansion for the Indus Valley Civilization that saw the development of several cities in the 
alluvial plain of the rivers Indus and Saraswati, nowadays in Pakistan and north-west India. The so-called 
Harappan culture appears to have been the first urban 
society that intentionally avoided to built monuments 
in their cities. Instead they concentrated on hydrological projects such as interconnected drain systems that 
could disperse storm waters, as well as platforms and 
walls of burnt bricks to control the floods. Mohenjo 
Daro is the largest known city of the Indus Valley. The 
quality of the baked brick construction, the extensive 
and cutting-edge water infrastructure in the house and 
the city, the regular layout of the city blocks in a rough 
grid plan, and the intricate public building compounds 
at the upper town indicate a sophisticated urban society.
1. Location of the six areas where the Urban Revolution happened independently as from ca. 9000 BC

## S. 3

3
1.02
The Early Settlements of Southwest Asia: 
Sedentary Life and the New Concept of Time
2. Göbekli Tepe: General plan of single sector, ca. 9000 BC. The oval temples are surrounded by houses
3. Aerial view of ovale temples
2
3

## S. 4

4
1.02
The Early Settlements of Southwest Asia: 
Sedentary Life and the New Concept of Time
4
5
6
4. Göbekli Tepe: Detail of two of the limestone monolith
5. The construction principle of the oval temples
6. Aerial view of ovale temples

## S. 5

5
1.02
7
8
7. Çatal Hüyük: Plan of a sector with a large number of buildings 
clustered together, ca. 7400 BC
8. Mural representing the dense urban plan of Çatal Hüyük with 
the volcano in the background
The Early Settlements of Southwest Asia: 
Sedentary Life and the New Concept of Time
p
3zo
e

## S. 6

6
1.02
9
10
11
12
13
9. Çatal Hüyük: Axonometry with roof circulation system
10. Plan of system of houses and courts in South-West section
11. Axonometry of a typical house with a sleeping platform (right), cooking platform (left) and a shrine in the middle
12.+13. Reconstruction of housing type with sleeping platform and cooking platform
The Early Settlements of Southwest Asia: 
Sedentary Life and the New Concept of Time
hostreets
soof
Landscape
connected
All in
one
room
In
P S
through
roof
-
* parts
red
are eleva
-good
for defendingthe city
Democratic
people

## S. 7

7
1.02
14
15
16
14. The Bronze Age Cities of Mesopotamia
15. Uruk: Urban plan, ca. 3000 BCE. Sumerians towns were 
characterized by the prominence of monumental religious buildings. While in later periods palaces occupied the centre of 
urban development, in the walled Sumerian settlements it were 
complexes of temples that were at the heart of the city
16. A comparison between the cities of Eridu, Susa and Uruk
The Bronze Age Cities of Mesopotamia:
Between Divine Monuments and Everyday Urban Fabric
-u
rich agriculture
city flous day
sumerian descrip
an
f
↳firsfthe cit

## S. 8

8
1.02
17
18
19
20
17. Uruk: The division of the city in districts with at the centre the Eanna district
18. The White Temple with its buttressed and white plastered walls situated on the ziggurat
19. Eanna precinct at Uruk
20. Plan of White Temple, Uruk
The Bronze Age Cities of Mesopotamia: 
Between Divine Monuments and Everyday Urban Fabric
City dedicated to
God -
only path
of
↳importane
religion

## S. 9

9
1.02
21
22
23
21. Nippur: Clay cuneiform tablet, features the first known depiction of a map, showing streets, canals and fields belonging to royal estates in the town of Nippur
22.+23. Clay cuneiform tablet, features the first known depiction of a map, showing streets, canals and fields belonging to royal estates in the town of Nippur
The Bronze Age Cities of Mesopotamia: 
Describing the Norms and Forms of the City
Differentof
-> Descriptions
types
maps
Palimpsest
& Rebuit
over and
-
overagain

## S. 10

10
1.02
24
25
24. The City of Ur, Mesopotamia (Iraq), ca. 2100 BCE. Within 
the oval outer walls, a north and a western port are situated. A 
canal traverses the city with at its centre a temenos, an orderly 
religious nucleus for the ziggurat
25. Birdseye view of Ur
The Bronze Age Cities of Mesopotamia: 
Relating Collective and Individual Life

## S. 11

11
1.02
26
27
28
29
26. Ur: View of courtyard of typical house
27. Typical house at Ur
28. Cluster of houses at Ur
29. Detail of a neighbourhood with streets (light grey) and houses with courtyards (dark grey), ca. 2100 BCE. The houses were mud 
brick structures with several rooms positioned around a courtyard. Usually there were no exterior windows and the connection to the 
street was obtained through a vestibule
The Bronze Age Cities of Mesopotamia: 
Relating Collective and Individual Life
Courtyard
House typology
4
- 5m
-X

## S. 12

12
1.02
30
31
32
30. Ur-Nammu: Plan of temple compound, ca 2100 BCE with the ziggurat (1), palace of E-Gi-Par (2), palace of E-Hur-Sag (3) and royal cemetery (4)
31. Reconstructed brick facade of Ancient Ziggurat at Ur
32. Perspectives of the Ziggurat at Ur-Nammu with the triple stair, pavilion at the landing and the bridal chamber at the summit
The Bronze Age Cities of Mesopotamia: 
Relating Collective and Individual Life

## S. 13

13
1.02
33
34
35
36
The Bronze Age Cities of Mesopotamia: 
The Invention of New Building Techniques
33. True arch (a), barrel vault (b), groin vault (c) and corbelled arch (d)
34. Arch of Shrine of Justice (detail), Ur, Iraq
35. Pitched brick vault from below (a) and in cross section (b)
36. Brick walls and corbel vault at the entrance to the tomb chamber of Ur-nammu in the royal mausoleum at Ur, late 3rd millennium BC

## S. 14

14
1.02
1
2
37
37. Standard of Ur, constructed in the form of a hollow wooden box with scenes of war and peace represented on each side through elaborately inlaid mosaics
The Bronze Age Cities of Mesopotamia: 
Internal Control and External Domination

## S. 15

15
1.02
38
39
40
The Cities of the Indus: 
Civic Infrastructure as Base for the Urban Condition
38. The cities of the Indus Valley civilization
39. Mohenjo-Daro: General plan with the two mounds of the high (west) and low (east) town, ca. 2600 BC
40. Urban fabric of the low town Mohenjo Daro, in Sindth Province, Pakistan
water and !
D
Boat infrastructure
Hirarding
of public
space

## S. 16

16
1.02
42
41
43
41. Mohenjo-Daro: House VIII at the lower town. Organized around an open courtyard and connected to the street through a porter lodge
42. Stair system at House VIII at the lower town Mohenjo Daro
43. Latticework that divides the common rooms of the house from the private rooms
The Cities of the Indus: 
Civic Infrastructure as Base for the Urban Condition
Living'
ele.
Servingspace
der t sleeping
under
I

## S. 17

17
1.02
44
45
46
44. House XIII at the lower town Mohenjo Daro
45. Interior of House XIII at the lower town Mohenjo Daro
46. House VIII at the lower town Mohenjo Daro
The Cities of the Indus: 
Civic Infrastructure as Base for the Urban Condition
at leastei
lay
two

## S. 18

18
1.02
47
48
49
47. Mohenjo-Daro: First street of the lower town
48.+49. Narrow Streets of the lower town Mohenjo Daro
The Cities of the Indus: 
Civic Infrastructure as Base for the Urban Condition
WiEnerge
Water into
every single hous
Ladea they wanted to realise

## S. 19

19
1.02
50
51
52
50.-52. Mohenjo-Daro: A complex system of public hygiene. Drains from the latrines of the private houses to the side streets and into 
large sewers on the main streets covered with bricks or dressed stone
The Cities of the Indus: 
Civic Infrastructure as Base for the Urban Condition

## S. 20

20
1.02
53
54
55
53. Mohenjo-Daro: The Upper Town
54. Detailed plan of the Upper Town with orthogonal alignments and broad streets with main public buildings: the granary (1), the Great 
Bath (2), the central paved street with subterranean drain (3) and the Budhist Stupa which was added ca. 400 AD
55. Plan of the Granary at Mohenjo-daro, Pakistan
The Cities of the Indus: 
Creating the Public Core

## S. 21

21
1.02
56
58
57
56. Mohenjo-Daro: The Great Bath, Pakistan
57. Axonometric of the Great Bath complex
58. Plan of the Great Bath complex
The Cities of the Indus: 
Creating the Public Core

## S. 22

22
1.02
Further reading:
Gates, Charles. Ancient Cities: The Archaeology of Urban 
Life in the Ancient Near East and Egypt, Greece, and 
Rome. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, 2011.
Hodder, Ian. The Leopard‘s Tale: Revealing the Mysteries 
of Çatalhöyük. New York, N.Y: Thames & Hudson, 2011.
Lampl, Paul. Cities and Planning in the Ancient Near East. 
New York: Georg Braziller, 1969.
Leick, Gwendolyn. Mesopotamia: The Invention of the 
City. New York: Penguin, 2003. 
Kenoyer, Jonathan M. Ancient Cities of the Indus Valley 
Civilization. Karachi: Oxford University Press, 2011.
McIntosh, Jane R. A Peaceful Realm: The Rise and Fall 
of the Indus Civilization. Boulder, Colo: Westview Press, 
2002.
Sources Images:
Ching, Francis D. K, Mark Jarzombek, and Vikramaditya 
Prakash. A Global History of Architecture. , 2017. (GA)
 
Ingersoll, Richard, and Spiro Kostof. World Architecture: 
A Cross-Cultural History. , 2015. (WA)
 
Gates, Charles. Ancient Cities: The Archaeology of Urban 
Life in the Ancient Near East and Egypt, Greece and 
Rome. Hoboken: Taylor and Francis, 2013. (AC)
James-Chakraborty, Kathleen. Architecture Since 1400. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2014
Dates and Facts
Neolithic period in the Near East ca. 8550-5000 BC
Göbekli Tepe 
 
 
ca. 
9000 
BC
Çatal Hüyük 
 
 
ca. 
7400 
BC
Earliest cities in Mesopotamia ca. 
5000 
BC
Uruk 
 
 
 
ca. 
3000 
BC
Ur 
 
 
 
ca. 
2100 
BC
Urbanization of Indus Valley 
ca. 
2800 
BC
Mohenjo-Daro 
 
ca. 
2600 
BC
