---
titel: "B1.01-SCRIPT"
quelle: "Studium Andrin (HSLU/ETH)"
datei: "B1.01-SCRIPT.pdf"
seiten: 52
ocr-seiten: 0
tags: [bauwissen, vorlesung]
---

# B1.01-SCRIPT

## S. 2

1
1.01
“Switzerland is the only place in the world 
that presents this mixture of savage nature 
and human industry. The entire realm of 
Switzerland is, in a way, nothing more than 
a great city, whose streets, longer and wider 
than the Faubourg Saint Antoine, are lost in 
the forests and cut by the mountains, and 
whose houses, scattered and isolated, are 
linked to each other solely by English gardens”
Jean-Jacques Rousseau, ‘Seventh promenade,’ Rêveries du Promeneur solitaire, Paris, 17781
1 The city?
The word ‘city’ derives from the Latin civilis, which 
means ‘befitting a citizen’.2 At the start of the 21st 
century, ‘the city’ has become the living condition 
for more than half of the world’s population.3 Some 
scholars even claim that we are experiencing a rapid process of ‘planetary urbanization’ in which the 
city will become not only the habitus for the majority 
of the earth’s population but also the ultimate working ground for architects.4 
Hence, it is no coincidence that an increased interest in the city exists today. What is this condition 
called ‘the city’ that we live and work in? How did 
it come into being? According to which principles 
was it developed? How did it evolve into the megalopolises that we know today? From many scientific 
fields –including geography, economy and sociology– a broad variety of perspectives and approaches 
have been developed to explain the various aspects 
and characteristics of the city. However, very often 
the actual spatial, formal and material qualities of the 
city have no role in these studies.
Also from the field of architecture multiple investigations into the city have been initiated. Following 
the pioneering studies of Delirious New York by 
Rem Koolhaas or Learning from Las Vegas by Robert Venturi, Denise Scott-Brown and Steven Izenour, 
numerous architects have mapped the complexities of cities in both the Global South and North, but 
sometimes without understanding how these conditions were the outcome of specific intentions and 
approaches.5 Too often cities have been depicted 
as self-organizing systems or processes.
2 A manmade material and spatial project
This course makes a case for the opposite hypothesis: it holds that the city is the result of a combination 
of willful acts that can be uncovered, mapped, understood and explained. Cities are no incidental occurrences, they are the material results of intentional 
decisions and processes. Along with other parties 
such as politicians, investors and citizens, architects 
and urban designers play a crucial role. By designing buildings, ensembles and neighborhoods they 
gradually shape the city. As a result, cities are some 
of our most complex spatial and material artefacts. 
In addition, they are the loci of the creation, use and 
experience of many other forms of material culture, 
but also of social, cultural, economic and political 
developments.
From very early times, the description of this complex artefact has raised attention and fascination. 
The desire to describe and depict this complex artifact has long fascinated urban civilizations. One 
of the well-known early attempts is the Forma Urbis Romae; a large marble city map of Rome from 
the beginning of the 3rd century. Following a great 
fire in Rome in 191, Emperor Septimius Severus not 
only rebuilt the famous Temple of Emperor Vespasian, but also commissioned a large marble map of 
Rome, which was made between 203 and 211 and 
attached to the wall of an auditorium of the temple. 
The History and Theory 
of the City as Project

## S. 3

2
1.01
The map measured 18 by 13 meters and consisted 
of 150 marble slabs with detailed outlines of individual buildings, streets and aqueducts. Together, 
these 150 slabs offered a full and detailed description of the private and public domains that existed in 
the urban condition called ‘Rome’.
In the Western world one of the first comprehensive 
and systematic accounts of the intentional conception of a city was delivered by Marcus Vitruvius Pollio 
or Vitruvius, a roman architect who lived in the first 
century BCE. In ten books, entitled De Architectura 
Libri Decem, Vitruvius offered as a set of architectural principles which outlined how a city could be 
built from scratch – beginning with the choice of the 
correct site and the laying out of walls (book 1) and 
the collection of building materials (book 2), continuing with the construction of different types of building 
(books 3 to 7), and finally securing the future flourishing of the city by supplying it with water (book 8), 
clocks (book 9) and defense mechanisms (book 10).6 
Reading De Architectura book by book, the matrix of 
a city comes into being, adaptable to local conditions 
as well as the size of the community. As the treatise 
unfolds, the contours of the ideal city emerge.
Vitruvius points to the fact that the conception of the 
city is always a matter of fabrica and ratiocinatio. 
Fabrica refers to the practice of building, while ratiocinatio denotes the conceptual approach to building. The architecture of the city is in other words not 
only a matter of construction, but also project of reasoning or theory: “The knowledge of the architect is 
furnished with many disciplines and various kinds 
of learning. (…) it is brought into being by fabrica and ratiocinatio. Fabrica is the continuous and 
routine practice the hands accomplish out of matter; 
its offspring is a work whose form is in keeping with 
its intended purpose. Ratiocinatio is what can show 
how, and explain to what degree, things have been 
made with skill and calculation.”7 Hence, Vitruvius 
illuminates that the architect’s conception of the city 
is a project of both thinking and making. 
The Renaissance architect Leon Battista Alberti 
adds to this perspective that conceiving the architecture of the city can be understood as a project. 
Unlike Vitruvius who in his treatise presents architecture as a complex discipline based on the description of the already existing fabrica and ratiocinatio, 
Alberti considers architecture as that which does not 
yet exist and must be conceived through a series of 
rules and standards. In his book De Re Aedificatoria 
Alberti defines architecture as a project of building 
the city, as establishing a relationship between the 
repetition of that which already exists and the production of the new.8 
This particular understanding of architecture as a 
project that establishes a relationship between the 
history and future of the city is exemplified in Alberti’s Descriptio Urbis Romae (ca 1448-1455).9 In 
this book Alberti undertakes a survey of remarkable 
precision that describes the layout of the walls, the 
location of the access gates to the Urbe, the course 
of the Tiber, and the most outstanding buildings of 
Antiquity and Christianity. This textual description 
of the layers and logics of the historical city lay the 
foundation for a future project for the city of Rome, 
the Civitas Dei, which will be realized following Pope 
Sixtus V’s decision.
Following Vitruvius and Alberti, the architecture of 
the city can be looked upon as a project, or a combination of projects, that are articulated, realized and 
developed through time and place, and that together constitute the forma urbis.

## S. 4

3
1.01
3 Urban Design as Engagement
Even the newest cities do not emerge ‘ex nihilo’. 
They can be understood as an engagement with, 
or a reaction to, existing conditions and situations. 
Theorists Donald Schön and Nigel Cross claim that 
architects and urban designers have a “reflective 
conversation with the situation” and are “immersed 
in material culture, and draw upon it as the primary 
source of their thinking”.10 
Topography is one of the basic conditions that have 
influenced the planning and design of cities. The development of towns began often in direct response 
to the existing topography and by inscription of the 
foundational surveying lines on the land. These first 
drawn schematics of towns in dirt illustrate the reciprocal relation between urban design and ‘geography’ (writing on earth) and ‘geometry’ (measuring 
the earth). The location, settlement pattern and form 
of cities are often closely intertwined with specific topographic conditions. Constantinople, for instance, is a good example of a city that is greatly 
determined by its particular geography. Its form and 
organization is a reaction to its hilly site, with the waters of the Bosporus to the South and the harbor of 
the Golden Horn to the East. The form of cities, their 
urban layout as well as their building typologies, 
also depend upon the characteristics of the soil, as 
the foundations of Amsterdam, the modest profile of 
Berlin and the high-rise character of Manhattan illustrate. Time and again, the height of the water table 
and the bearing capacity of the ground determine 
the architecture of the city.
Cities also maintain a specific relation to the materials that are sourced and produced in their territories. The city of Bogota (Colombia) illuminates how 
the massive production of red brick in the numerous 
small chircales (the local name for brck manufactories) influenced the construction and aesthetic of 
the city. Not only the self-built houses in the periphery of the city, but also the urban experiments such 
as the Torres del Parque (1965) by avant-garde 
architect Rogelio Salmona employ red brick as the 
basic material for the architectural definition of the 
vertical and horizontal surfaces of the city. A similar logic can be identified in the Royal Crescents by 
John Wood in the city of Bath (UK, 1767-75), where 
the limestone that was mined in the quarries of the 
region, became the predominant building material 
and informed the common aesthetic code for the 
various urban extensions.
Ancient texts illustrate that an important concern 
of urban design was climate. Hippocrates, for instance, suggest in his treatise On Airs, Waters, and 
Places (400 BCE) that “Cities that are exposed to 
winds between the summer and the winter risings 
of the sun, and those the opposite to them, have the 
following characters: Those which lie to the rising of 
the sun are all likely to be more healthy than such 
as are turned to the North, or those exposed to the 
hot winds.”11 Such an approach to urban design was 
also maintained by Vitrivius, who believed that there 
were eight different winds and advised that “the directions of your streets and alleys be laid down on 
the lines of division between two winds.”12 Humidity, heath and cold have also in modern times been 
defining factors for the development and design of 
cities. The intricate network of underground spaces 
of the city of Montreal (Canada) or the porticoes of 
Bologna (Italy), illustrate how the cold climate can 
be a driver of a very specific form of subterranean 
urban development. 
The design of the city has always been the instigator and expression of cultural developments, as 
the passages of Paris illustrate. Designed and developed during a period of growing bourgeoisie 
capitalism, these glass roofed and marble-paneled 
corridors extending through whole city blocks that 
not only served not to enhance the public realm, but 
were also an effective method of urban densification providing additional profit through the insertion 
of commerce.13 The arcades became the scene for

## S. 5

4
1.01
much of the late 18th- early 19th century bourgeois 
public life as well as the home of the Parisian flâneur, 
a key figure in the writings of Charles Baudelaire and 
Walter Benjamin.14 Another example, are the Garden 
Squares in the city of London which mainly emerged 
from the urbanization of Common land outside the 
city walls that had been used for fairs, markets and 
sport since medieval times. The Garden Squares 
are urban figures that are nor fully public nor fully 
private, but represent an important common realm 
which is characteristic of the urban culture of London.
Philosophical texts and treatises have underpinned 
the conception and the development of the city 
throughout time. In the famous treatise Politeia (The 
State) the Greek philosopher Plato (427-347 BCE) 
defines a set of principles of city planning and city 
governance.15 The harmonization of the whole (the 
City) with the part (the individual) is an important 
point of attention for Plato, as exemplified by his vision on urban allotment and the access of citizens 
to their city. As a result, the theoretical city of Plato is divided into twelve sections, and each citizen 
will have two residences, one urban and central, 
the other rural and peripheral. The geometry of the 
urban layout can –according to Plato– regulate the 
relation between the citizens and the collective. Plato’s philosophical viewpoints would form the basis 
for the planning of Piraeus (Athens, Greece, ca 450 
BCE) by the Greek architect Hippodamus of Miletus.
From the very first urban settlements belief systems 
and religion played a paramount role in the design 
of the city. A good example are the cities of the early Islamic empire, which generally followed the socalled Sassanid ideological structure. The city as an 
orthogonal figure was divided into four districts with 
the great mosque and the palace at the very center. The central combination of palace and mosque 
symbolically embodied the importance of both the 
religious and the political power in the city. In 762 
these principles also formed the basis for the planning of Baghdad, the new capital of the Empire, with 
all the appropriate symbolism of a round city with 
axial division.16 
This religious aspect was however not only a matter 
of general urban planning but also of the everyday 
urban fabric. Islamic Law, which itself was extracted from the Qu’ran and the Summa, also formed the 
basis for the formulation of Principles of building 
solutions or Akham.17 These include principles by 
which one is encouraged to exercise one’s personal 
rights to the fullest extent, without harming others. It 
also outlines codes concerning acoustic and visual 
forms of privacy, as well as the rights of the community in public sharis and finas (thoroughfares and 
alleys). In cities like Tunis these principles are traceable in the urban fabric. 
Politics, understood as the aspirations, decisions 
and rhetoric of politicians, have strongly influenced 
urban design in various ways.18 Urban design has 
been used to underline the importance of existing 
political systems. An important example is that of 
the Stalin Allee (1949), which was the flagship urban 
project of East Germany’s socialist reconstruction 
program after the Second World War. Sometimes 
urban design has heralded political change. The 
grand design for the city of Chandigarh (1953), the 
new capital of the Punjab region, was considered 
by Jawaharlal Nehru as a celebration of the new 
political regime in independent India. The gridded 
urban layout, but especially the intentional variation 
of housing typologies within the different neighborhoods of the city, were expressions of a modern India in which the social distinction between castes 
would disappear.19
Social life has often been a prime concern of urban 
design. When the Spanish Ildefonso Cerda (1815-
1876) designed the great plan of Barcelona in 1859 
he offered an alternative for the radio-concentric

## S. 6

5
1.01
model of urban planning and replaced it by a grid of 
coordinates that afforded all citizens equal access 
to the city center. The grid became the design tool to 
achieve social equality in a spatial way. At the same 
time, urban design has often expressed or even installed social segregation. For instance in several 
colonial cities, such as the villes nouvelles that were 
planned by Henri Prost and his team in Morocco at 
the beginning of the 20th century. In cities, such as 
Meknes, we encounter the figure of the so-called 
‘zone sanitaire’ or ‘cordon sanitaire’, which encompassed a non-built area that was often explained in 
hygienic terms, but which at the same time installed 
a strong spatial divide between different social or 
ethnic groups – a pure act of ‘urban apartheid’.20
The 19th century plan for Regent Street and its surroundings by John Nash illustrates that economic 
concerns are often also a key driver of urban design. Nash’s new urban plan, which was commissioned by the English crown, proposed to replace 
the existing small-scale dilapidated medieval urban 
fabric with large formal urban complexes along a 
representative street. This urban design operation 
followed the property lines of the area and radically 
changed the neighborhood of Regent Street from a 
low-cost housing area into a district with high-end 
rental prices. Economy was also a main factor for 
the large urban extensions in post-war France. In 
cities such as Paris and Marseille the new social 
housing of the so-called Grands Ensembles, which 
was constructed in the latter half of the 20th century, was planned on cheap grounds in the periphery 
of the city, where they created banlieues of satellite 
housing estates that were disconnected from public 
services and spaces of the city center. 
Changes in building techniques can also radically 
alter the forma urbis, as was bluntly illustrated in 
19th century Chicago. When the steel skeleton was 
implemented for projects like the Home Insurance 
Building by William Le Baron Jenney (1884-85) it 
not only introduced a new construction technique at 
the level of the single building, but also opened the 
perspective towards a completely new urban form: 
the high rise city.21 Also in the 20th century architects 
and urban designers forged new relationships between urban design and construction techniques, 
as the urban projects that were undertaken by the 
architects and urban designers of Das Neue Bauen 
in Germany in the first decades of the 20th century 
exemplified. In the Dessau Törten estate by Walter 
Gropius, for instance, the rationalization and mechanization of the new urban neighborhood was one 
of the main considerations in the urban layout and 
the aesthetics of the building.22 Promoting this relationship between rationalized building technique 
and the architecture of the city would become part 
of the standard rhetoric of the architects of the modern movement. 
Artistic expressions, from poetry to sculpture, painting and movie making, have always had a strong reciprocal relation to urban design and development. 
Artists have often spurred on changes in urban design attitudes. In his seminal movie Deux ou Trois 
Choses que je sais d’elle (1967), the French director 
Jean-Luc Godard, for instance, offered a profound 
critique of the post-war urban extensions of Paris, 
denouncing the rationality and anonymity of the new 
urban neighborhoods. The critique of Godard and 
others, such as photographer Robert Doisneau, did 
not go by unnoticed, but caused a profound change 
in contemporary urban design attitudes towards the 
Parisian periphery. Architects and urban designers 
have also been inspired by artistic representations 
of the city. The five Citta di Fondazione (Littoria, Pontinia, Sabaudia, Aprilia and Pomezia) that were built 
by the fascist regime as new towns in the Pontine 
Marshes near Rome between 1932 and 1939, are 
good examples. Their urban design was innovative 
because it conceptualized the city as the center of 
an integral network within a wider agricultural area. 
The form and symbolism of their public spaces relied on so-called metaphysical painterly explorations 
by Italian artists like Giorgio de Chirico.

## S. 7

6
1.01
Against this background, urban design appears as 
a project of engagement with a variety of realities 
and factors, all of which contribute to the character 
of the condition that we call the city.
4 The Project of History and Theory
The city is not only a project for architects and urban 
designers, but also for historians and theoreticians. 
Historians and theoreticians have adopted particular methodological and conceptual vantage points 
to approach the condition that we call the city. Although systematic historical studies of the city and 
urban design only emerged at the end of the 19th 
century, earlier traces of historical accounts of the 
city do exist. 
Schematically, the history of modern urban planning 
has three pedigrees. First, there is a literary tradition of describing the city as experience of images, 
sounds and smells. In such early literary descriptions (for instance by Louis-Sébastien Mercier and 
Daniel Defoe) the city does not appear as a backdrop, but as a new product of civilization; as a künstlicher lebensraum, which touches and influences 
the mentality of the people.23 
In the 18th century, also the myth of the metropolis 
emerged. The city was increasingly described as a 
center of trade, traffic and financial markets by sensitive travelers like Georg Foster, who depicted (in 
writing) the new metropolitan experience in cities 
like Amsterdam as characterized by loneliness, anonymity and indifference.24 These themes are widely 
explored in 19th century literature (by, for instance, 
Edgar Allan Poe and Charles Baudelaire) and by 
the end of the 19th century become the subject of 
more scientific reflection in the urban sociological 
studies of Max Weber, Georg Simmel and Werner 
Sombart.25 
Other early (pre-19th century) accounts approach the 
city as an organism. Here rather than the form, the 
functioning of the city is central. This model became 
popular in French and Scottish circles in the 18th 
century, especially in the work of the biologist and 
planner Patrick Geddes. He introduced a whole new 
vocabulary that can be used to talk about the city in 
terms of heart, lungs, veins and tissue; an approach 
that still resonates today with architects and urban 
planners today. This paradigm approaches the city 
as a spatial and social body, with such a complex 
structure and organization, and such a capacity for 
growth and adaptation, that it resembles a biological 
environment. The organic paradigm opens up the 
possibility for discourses on the illness of the body, 
as well as on its cure and healing. In his Cities in 
Evolution (1915) Geddes compares the theory of human evolution with the evolution of city, which both 
have an “origin”, a “life process” and a “future”.26 
Geddes describes the city “as the specialized organ 
of social transmission. It is the vehicle of acquired 
inheritance. It accumulates and embodies the cultural heritage of a region, and combines it (...) with 
the cultural heritage of larger units, national, racial, 
religious, human. It stamps the resultant product 
upon each passing generation of its citizens”.27 According to Geddes, without cities, there would be no 
human evolution and no history. He considers cities 
as the only medium to transfer cultural and historical 
achievements to the future. In Geddes’ own words: 
“in the scheme of nature it is the essential function of 
cities to transmit the culture heritage of mankind.”28
A third pedigree emerges from the viewpoints of 
historians who saw the city as a political archive of 
licenses, rights, and privileges, which together form 
the legitimation for the political ideas that develop 
the city. In this perspective, written sources prevail 
over buildings and objects. A good example of this 
perspective can be found with the German historian 
Christoph Meiners, who in 1792 wrote Geschichte 
der Ungleichheit der Stände unter den vornehmsten

## S. 8

7
1.01
europäischen Völkern, which reduces the development of late medieval cities in Germany, the Netherlands and Italy to a question of bourgeois ethos and 
practice, as well as of administrative culture.29 
These three pedigrees –which can be summarized 
with the labels of the city as experience, the city as 
organism and the city as archive– continue to play a 
role today. However, from the end of the 19th century, 
a more spatially- and materially-oriented historiography of the city complemented these three pedigrees. 
This spatial and material historical investigation of 
the city was often undertaken by architects and urban designers who constructed histories to support 
their design practices. An important attempt to construct such a history of urban design came from the 
Catalonian architect Ildefonso Cerdá who would become responsible for planning the extension of the 
Spanish city of Barcelona. In the first two books of 
his Teoría general de la urbanización (1856) Cerdá 
offers a written historical and cross-cultural overview 
based on the settlement principles and the compositional characteristics of cities.30 He, for instance, 
differentiates between categories such as “Asiatic 
and Oriental urbanization”, “Arabic-Spanish urbanization” and “Indigenous American urbanization”, on 
the basis of their relation with the surrounding territory, morphology and the different typologies that they 
encompass.
A seminal contribution came from the Viennese architect Camillo Sitte, who in 1889 published Der 
Städtebau nach seinen künstlerischen Grundsätzen.31 This study sprung from Sitte’s anger about 
the ‘massacre’ caused by the Vienna urban transformation plan, which was ratified by emperor 
Frans-Joseph in 1858. In Der Städtebau Sitte relies 
on the findings of contemporary archaeology, his 
own historical surveys of the city and the writings of 
Aristotle, Vitruvius and Alberti. Sitte underlines that 
different types of spatial organization are linked to 
the cultural particularities of specific communities. 
Nevertheless, he also conceives of urban space as 
a material and spatial container with a certain autonomy. Sitte maintains that especially the aesthetic 
qualities and the shape of the container allow it to 
be dissociated from its content. Hence, historical urban structures are attributed a value in themselves, 
independent of any significant reference to current 
events. Sitte’s historiography deliberately uses black 
and white plan analysis in an attempt to abstract his 
examples and derive from them generic principles 
for the urban design practice of his time. Hence, 
the principles of spatial organization of the ancient 
acropolises, agoras or squares of Mantua, Padua, 
Florence, Pisa, Parma or Nuremberg are analyzed 
as historical precedents that contain lessons for the 
present.
Sitte’s studies also inspired the historical investigation of urban design in Town Planning in Practice: 
An Introduction to the Art of Designing Cities and 
Surburbs (1909) by Raymond Unwin, an English designer of garden cities.32 
 Unwin employs a historical method in which plans 
and perspectives of different urban spaces were 
compared in order to achieve a “classification of 
the different types of plans which have evolved in 
the course of natural growth or have been designed 
at different periods by human art”.33 For Unwin the 
history of the city, planned and unplanned, offers a 
base of knowledge from which the future of the forma 
urbis can be conceived. His historical survey aims to 
construct a manual of ideas and approaches, which 
are ordered in categories such as “Of Centres and 
Enclosed Spaces”, “Of Site Planning and Residential Roads” and “On Plots and Placing of Buildings”. 
These, Unwin believed could be immediately, if not 
literally, given his insistence on “the individuality of 
towns”, be activated in design approaches. 
Around the same time as
 Unwin outlined his instrumental historical approach 
to cities, the American architects Daniel Hudson 
Burnham and Edward Herbert Bennett published

## S. 9

8
1.01
their Plan of Chicago (1909). This book did, however, not start with a survey of the existing city but 
with a general history of urban design from Antiquity to the Beaux-Arts.34 In their study, the history of 
urban design is cast as a continuous project of interventions with an extensive cast of actors: the city 
is presented as the result of an ongoing sequence 
of plans that are realized, destroyed or amended. 
In the work of Burnham and Bennet the history of 
urban design appears as large library of concepts 
and approaches to the architecture of the city. British architect Henry Aldridge similarly starts his Case 
for Town Planning. A practical manual for the use 
of councillors, officers and others engaged in the 
preparation of town planning schemes (1915) with a 
detailed historical account of urban design as “one 
of the oldest of the arts evolved in the slow development of organized civic life in civilized countries”.35 
Aldridge perceives the development of urban design as a matter of realized and non-realized projects and explicitly reminds his readers that these 
are firmly situated in a matrix of political, economic 
and cultural developments.
A very ambitious historical investigation of urban 
design was The American Vitruvius: An Architects’ 
Handbook of Civic Art (1922) by urban planners 
Werner Hegemann and Elbert Peets. It drew on earlier studies (such as those of Sitte and Unwin) as well 
as on examples from three millennia of urban history 
and comprised more than 1200 illustrations.36 
Hegemann and Peets no longer discuss urban design in general terms, but focus on key constituent 
elements of the city, such as plazas and courts, 
streets and gardens. They explore the characteristics of these various elements across cultures, thus 
creating subtle thematic connections across time. 
The American Vitruvius starts to outline a knowledge field on the design of the city that is based not 
only on the development of actual cities, but also 
on non-realized proposals, imaginary projects and 
competitions. Hegemann and Peets implicitly suggest that all of these should be part of the collective 
professional memory of the architect and the urban 
designer. 
American critic Lewis Mumford adopted a different 
approach to the history of urban design than Hegeman and Peets. His writings, which include his 
famous book The Culture of Cities (1938), was not 
informed by design practice but by architectural 
criticism.37 Mumford believed that a critique of urban 
and architectural design could be best established 
against the background of historical knowledge. 
As a result, Mumford became one of the authors 
to most profoundly analyze the space of Baroque 
cities, and critically evaluated their relationship with 
the transformations of political power and technology. In his publications Mumford also elaborated a 
complex and cultured vocabulary to talk about the 
design and development of the city.
The discipline of art history also made important 
contributions to the architectural history of urban design in the 1920s. Of note is the work of the French 
art historian Pierre Lavedan and that of his Swiss 
colleague Joseph Gantner. Lavedan’s Histoire de 
L’Urbanisme (1926) presents a fascinating history of 
urban plans, in which the concept of permanence is 
central.38 
He outlines that while changes are occurring constantly in the urban fabric, there is at the same time 
a certain permanence of urban elements such as 
buildings, streets, bridges and squares. Gantner’s 
Grundformen Der Europäischen Stadt: Versuch 
Eines Historischen Aufbaues in Genealogien (1928) 
is an attempt at an interpretation of the city as a 
work of art, using the stylistic methods of investigation that his master the art historian Heinrich Wölfflin 
developed.39 Against this background, the city is 
mainly studied through urban plans, complemented 
by aerial photography, which according to Gantner 
give “an impression of the location, shape and size 
of the city in such lively and suggestive ways as no 
printed or drawn map ever can”.40 For Gantner, the

## S. 10

9
1.01
city map and aerial photographs, together with additional data from the history of the house, the garden and landscape art, are the basic material for a 
historical genealogy of urban planning. In his view, 
the basic forms of the European city are determined 
by the doctrine of the immanent duality of two urban 
formations: the irregular city and the regular city. 
Both have their own genealogy, which Gantner believes subsequently crystallizes into building types. 
According to Gantner, the historiography of urban 
planning is a search for the immanence of form, 
which he believes is inherent in the general urban 
layout.
It was the Italian architect Saveiro Muratori who initiated a comprehensive morphological and typological history of the city into the field of architecture in 
his Studi per una operante storia urbana di Venezia (1959). In this research he closely describes 
the built form of neighborhoods (morphology) and 
buildings (typology) in Venice. Using the instrument of drawing, he illustrates how buildings and 
neighborhoods have the capacity to accommodate 
change throughout time, while maintaining some of 
their initial characteristics. In his study Muratori depicts the built environment as a material organism 
that constantly changes and adapts. He adopted a 
so-called typo-morphological approach in which he 
focused on the dialectical relationship of the physical evolution of the form of a city and its building 
types – in Muratori’s case, mainly housing. 
The concepts of immanence and permanence defined by Gantner and Lavedan, as well as the work 
on urban morpho-typology by Muratori, greatly influenced the Italian architect Aldo Rossi, who in his 
book The Architecture of the City (1966), offers a 
history and theory on the connection of those driving principles of urban development.41 Rossi gives a 
leading role to urban artifacts; buildings that shape 
the city. Cities, according to Rossi, owe their creation and spatial pattern not to abstract planning 
schemes, but to the technical perfection of the architectural form. The Roman Colosseum and the 
Berlage fair in Amsterdam, which throughout history 
have proven to be able to offer space to various social and economic programs, prove this. Central to 
Aldo Rossi’s book is therefore the question of the 
origin and nature of the forces that give architecture 
this ability to function as a propeller in the city. The 
relationship of architecture to the collective memory 
of the city is considered as paramount.
This architectural tradition of approaching the history of urban design would be further developed in the 
second part of the twentieth century, with substantial contributions by authors like Leonardo Benevolo, 
Jean Castex and Philippe Pannerai, Rem Koolhaas, 
Collin Rowe and Fred Koetter, Geoffrey Broadbent, 
Richard Plunz and Vittorio Lampugnani.42 
5 The Project of the Course
This course is situated within this specific and 
long-lasting architectural exploration of the history of 
the city. It addresses the history and theory of urban 
design as a matter of material culture in which architects and urban designers have an explicit agency. 
Through discussions and interactions with economists, politicians, planners and citizens they define 
how we approach this most complex artefact in our 
material culture; how we engage with its memory, 
how its condition is understood and how its future 
can be conceived. 
Architects cast particular lenses over the history of 
the city. They are interested in the composition, the 
typologies and the materialities of the city. The foundational principles, the patterns of evolution as well 
as the potentials for further development are at the 
center of the architect’s interest in the history of the 
city. Architects want to understand how the material

## S. 11

10
1.01
Sources:
1 
 Jean-Jacques Rousseau, ‘Seventh promenade,’ Rêveries du Promeneur solitaire (Paris, 1778), 146 
quoted in Anthony Vidler, ‘The Scenes of the Street: Transformations in Ideal and Reality, 1759-1871’, On Streets, ed. 
Stanford Anderson (New York: The Institute for Architecture 
and Urban Studies/The MIT Press, 1978), 28-111.
2 
 Ainsworth, Robert, Benjamin W. Beatson, and William Ellis. Thesaurus Linguae Latinae Compendiarius: Ainsworth’s Latin Dictionary. London: F. Westley and A.H. Davis, 
1836. 
3 
 Burdett, Richard, and Deyan Sudjic. The Endless 
City: The Urban Age Project by the London School of Economics and Deutsche Bank’s Alfred Herrhausen Society. London: Phaidon, 2007.
4 
 Brenner, Neil. Implosions/explosions: Towards a 
Study of Planetary Urbanization. Berlin: Jovis, 2014.
5 
 Koolhaas, Rem. Delirious New York: A Retroactive Manifesto for Manhattan. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1978; Venturi, Robert, Denise S. Brown, and Steven 
Izenour. Learning from Las Vegas. Cambridge, Mass: The 
MIT Press, 1972
6 
 An English translation of Vitruvius’ opus maiorum 
can be found in: Vitruvius, Pollio, Ingrid D. Rowland, and 
Thomas N. Howe. Ten Books on Architecture. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2007.
7 
 McEwen, Indra K. Vitruvius:Writing the Body of 
Architecture. Cambridge (Mass.: MIT Press, 2003), 32. The 
original Latin phrasing reads: “Architecti est scientia pluribus disciplinis et variis eruditionibus ornata, quae ab ceteris 
artibus perficiuntur. Opera ea nascitur et fabrica et ratiocinatione. Fabrica est continuata ac trita usus meditatio, quae 
manibus perficitur e materia cuiuscumque generis opus est 
ad propositum deformationis. Ratiocinatio autem est, quae 
res fabricatas sollertiae ac rationis proportione demonstrare 
atque explicare potest.”
8 
 Alberti, Leon Battista. De re aedificatoria. On the art 
of building in ten books. (translated by Joseph Rykwert, Robert Tavernor and Neil Leach). Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
MIT Press, 1988.
9 
 Alberti, Leon Battista, Mario Carpo, and Martine 
Furno. Descriptio Urbis Romae. Genève: Droz, 1999.
10 
 Schon, Donald A. The Reflective Practitioner: How 
Professionals Think in Action. New York: Basic Books, 1991, 
4;
Cross, N. Designerly Ways of Knowing. Open University, Design Education Research Programme, 1982, 225.
11 
 Hippocrates. Ancient Medicine. Airs, Waters, 
Places. Epidemics 1 and 3. The Oath. Precepts. Nutriment. Translated by W. H. S. Jones. Loeb Classical Library 
147. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1923. See 
for the full text of Hippocrates also: http://classics.mit.edu/
Hippocrates/airwatpl.mb.txt
12 
 Broadbent, Geoffrey. Emerging Concepts in Urban 
Space Design. London: Taylor & Francis, 2005, 7.
13 
 Hahn, H H. Scenes of Parisian Modernity: Culture 
and Consumption in the Nineteenth Century. Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2009.
14 
 Benjamin, Walter. Charles Baudelaire: A Lyric Poet 
in the Era of High Capitalism. London: Verso, 1973
15 
 Charbit Yves. ‘The Platonic City: History and Utopia’, in: Population (English edition), 57e année, n°2, 2002, 
207-235.
16 
 Khosravi, Hamed, ‘The Political Theology of the Islamic City’, in: Aureli, Pier V. The City As a Project. Berlin: 
Ruby Press, 2013, 70-100.
17 
 Hakim, Besim S. Arabic-islamic Cities: Building and 
Planning Principles. London: Routledge, 2013.
18 
 Lane, Barbara M. Architecture and Politics in Germany, 1918-1945. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University 
Press, 1968.
19 
 Avermaete, Tom, Maristella Casciato, Yto Barrada, 
Takashi Honma, and Mirko Zardini. Casablanca Chandigarh: 
A Report on Modernization. Montréal: Canadian Centre for 
Architecture, 2014.
and spatial realm in which they operate, relates to 
the social, economic, cultural and political realms 
that constitute the city – and in which many other 
urban stakeholders have their say. They are interested in how the form of the city expresses certain 
political, economic or cultural norms, and how the 
form of the city eventually imposes these norms on 
those who inhabit it. They equally want to know to 
what extent the architecture of the city has a certain 
autonomy, how (or if) it can remain unaffected by 
changing social, political and cultural practices. 
Architects want to understand their role within the 
development of the city. They want to gain insight 
into how architectural elements, forms and materials 
follow or prescribe the structures and cultures of the 
city. To interrogate the history of the city through this 
architectural lens is the project of this course.

## S. 12

11
1.01
20 
 Abu-Lughod, Janet L. Rabat: Urban Apartheid in 
Morocco. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980.
21 
 Willis, Carol, Form Follows Finance: Skyscrapers 
and Skylines in New York and Chicago. Princeton Architectural Press, 1995.
22 
 Schwarting, Andreas, and Walter Gropius. Die 
Siedlung Dessau-Törten: Rationalität Als Ästhetisches Programm. Dresden: Thelem, 2010.
23 
 Mercier, Louis-Sébastien. Tableau De Paris. Hambourg: Virchaux, 1781; Defoe, Daniel. A Journal of the Plague 
Year: Being Observations or Memorials, of the Most Remarkable Occurrences ... Which Happened in London During 
the Last Great Visitation in 1665. London: E. Nutt, 1722.
24 
 Forster, Georg, and Leo Just. Reisebriefe Aus Den 
Niederlanden, 1790. Brüssel: Verlag de Lage Landen, 1943.
25 
 Poe, Edgar A. Collected Works of Edgar Allen 
Poe. Cambridge, Mass: Belknap Press of Harvard University 
Press, 1979; Baudelaire, Charles, and Louise Varèse. Paris 
Spleen, 1869. New York: New Directions Pub. Corp., 1970; 
Weber, Max, Horst Baier, and Wilfried Nippel. Die Stadt. Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr, 1999; Simmel, Georg. Die Großstädte 
Und Das Geistesleben. Dresden: Zahn & Jaensch, 1903; 
Sombart, Werner, Der moderne Kapitalismus, Leipzig 
1902/1927; Sombart, Werner, ‘Der Begriff der Stadt und das 
Wesen der Städtebildung’, in: Archiv für Sozialwissenschaften und Sozialpolitik 25 (1907), 1–9.
26 
26 Geddes, Patrick. Cities in Evolution. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1950, 3–4.
27 
 Branford, Victor, and Patrick Geddes. The Coming 
Polity: A Study in Reconstruction. London: Williams & Norgate, 1917, 153–154.
28 
 Branaford, Victor, and Patrick Geddes. The Coming 
Polity: A Study in Reconstruction. London: Williams & Norgate, 1917, 157.
29 
 Meiners, Christoph. Geschichte Der Ungleichheit 
Der Stände Unter Den Vornehmsten Europäischen Völkern: 
2. Hannover: Helwing, 1792.
30 
 Cerdá, Ildefonso. General Theory of Urbanization 
1867. New York: Actar Publishers, 2018.
31 
 Sitte, Camillo. Der Städte-Bau: Nach Seinen Künstlerischen Grundsatzen: Ein Beitrag Zur Lösung Modernster 
Fragen Der Architektur Und Monumentalen Plastik Unter Besonderer Beziehung Auf Wien. Wien: Graeser, 1889.
32 
 Unwin, Raymond. Town Planning in Practice: An 
Introduction to the Art of Designing Cities and Suburbs. London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1909.
33 
 Ibid., 54.
34 
 Burnham, Daniel H, Edward H. Bennett, and 
Charles Moore. Plan of Chicago. Chicago: The Commercial 
Club, 1909.
35 
 Aldridge, Henry R. The Case for Town Planning: A 
Practical Manual for the Use of Councillors, Officers, and Others Engaged in the Preparation of Town Planning Schemes. 
London: The National Housing and Twown Planning Council, 
1917
36 
 Hegemann, Werner, and Elbert Peets. The American Vitruvius: An Architect’s Handbook of Civic Art. New 
York: Architectural Book Pub. Co, 1922.
37 
 Mumford, Lewis. The Culture of Cities. London: 
Secker & Warburg, 1938.
38 
 Lavedan, Pierre. Histoire De L’urbanisme: Antiquité, 
Moyen-Âge. Paris: H. Laurens, 1926.
39 
 Gantner, Joseph. Grundformen Der Europäischen 
Stadt: Versuch Eines Historischen Aufbaues in Genealogien. 
Wien: Schroll, 1928.
40 
 Ibid, 25.
41 
 Rossi, Aldo. L’architettura Della Città. Padova: Marsilio, 1966.
42 
 Benevolo, Leonardo. Storia Della Città. Roma: Laterza, 1976; Castex, Jean, Jean-Charles Depaule, and Philippe Panerai. Formes Urbaines, De L’îlot À La Barre. Paris: Dunod, 1977; Koolhaas, Rem. Delirious New York: A Retroactive 
Manifesto for Manhattan. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1978; Rowe, Colin, and Fred Koetter. Collage City. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1978; Broadbent, Geoffrey. Emerging Concepts in Urban Space Design. London: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1990; Plunz, Richard. A History of Housing 
in New York City: Dwelling Type and Social Change in the 
American Metropolis. New York: Columbia University Press, 
1992; Magnago, Lampugnani V, and Matthias Noell. Stadtformen: Die Architektur Der Stadt Zwischen Imagination Und 
Konstruktion. Zürich: Gta Verl, 2005.

## S. 13

12
1.01
1. Giovanni Battista Piranesi, Map of ancient Rome and Forma Urbis (203-211)
2. Forma Urbis: The Porticus Aemilia
3. Fragment of the Forma Urbis
2
3
A Manmade Material and Spatial Project
Mapping and Understanding the City
1

## S. 14

13
1.01
2
3
A Manmade Material and Spatial Project
Mapping and Understanding the City

## S. 15

14
1.01
4. + 5. Rome, Circular description, based on Leon Battista 
Alberti Descriptio Urbis Romae (ca. 1448-1455).
6. Sketch by Gian Francesco Bordino of new street connections between the holy places of Rome, as commissioned by 
Pope Sixtus V (1588).
7. Portrait of Pope Sixtus V with the holy places of Rome for 
which he commissioned a new urban design. Pietro Facchetti, 1590.
4
5
A Manmade Material and Spatial Project
Mapping and Understanding the City

## S. 16

15
1.01
6
7
A Manmade Material and Spatial Project
Mapping and Understanding the City

## S. 17

16
1.01
8. Constantinople, The urban form was greatly determined by 
its particular geography, with the waters of the Bosphorus to 
the South and the harbor of the Golden Horn to the East. The 
oldest known map of Constantinople, 1420.
9. The Golden Horn Wall from the Panorama of Constantinople by Melchior Lorichs (1559)
8
9
Urban Design as Engagement
The Ground

## S. 18

17
1.01
10
11
Urban Design as Engagement
The Ground
10. Meassuring the territory as a first act of urban design. 
Illustration from Henri de Suberville, L’Henry-metre, 1598
11. Simone Martini, Guidoriccio da Fogliano at the siege of 
Montemassi, 1328

## S. 19

18
1.01
12. Boston, the relation of morphology and geography at 
Scollay Square.
13. Cairo, the ancient centre and the new urban centres in 
relation to the topographical figure of the Nile.
14. Cairo, the metro system in relation to the topographical 
figure of the Nile.
12
13
14
Urban Design as Engagement
The Ground

## S. 20

19
1.01
15
16
17
Urban Design as Engagement
The Ground
15. Las Vegas, A city along a street: The Las Vegas strip
16. The urbanization pattern of Las Vegas.
17. Urban Plan of Ostia which was developed along the Decumanus Maximus and the Cardo Maximus.

## S. 21

20
1.01
18
19
20
Urban Design as Engagement
The Ground

## S. 22

21
1.01
21
22
Urban Design as Engagement
The Ground
18. Amsterdam, A bird's eye view, looking south and before the construction of the semi-circular ring of canals. The waterway 
in the middle (connecting the Dam with the IJ) is known as the Damrak. Ships were unloaded on the west bank of the Damrak, 
indicated on the map as ‘Opt Waeter’ (on the water). Woodcut by Cornelis Anthonisz, 1544.
19. Anonymous design for a tow bridge with typical foundation of wooden poles.
20. Principle of Amsterdam foundations on wooden poles.
21. The construction of sky scrapers in New York City began in downtown, around Wall St. at the lower end of Manhattan Island, 
but soon spread north. Here's where things begin to get a little more interesting. This is partially based on the depth of the bedrock underneath the city. Large buildings need to be anchored to bedrock in order to prevent potentially uneven settling. The 
bedrock is within a few feet of the ground surface in Midtown, and within 40 feet of the surface in Downtown.
22. Geological map of Manhattan.

## S. 23

22
1.01
24
25
23
Urban Design as Engagement
The Ground

## S. 24

23
1.01
26
27
Urban Design as Engagement
The Ground
23. Lisbon, Eugénio dos Santos, Design for buildings in Lisbon’s Baixa, 1756
24. Plan of the city of Lisbon, Portugal (1755) by chief engineer Colonel Carlos Mardel (1695-1763), and Captain Eugenio dos Santos (1711-1760)
25. Prospect of Rua Nova do Carmo on the side that looks 
to the east.
26. Tokyo neighborhood.
27. Kawaraban (news broadsheets) "Yomiuri" depicting the 
large earthquake that hit the city of Tokyo (then Edo) in 1855, 
thought to have caused the loss of more than 7000 lives.
ho parting walls
↳presentationt
↳sengagement with ground

## S. 25

24
1.01
28
30
29
Urban Design as Engagement
Materials
28. Bogota, The urban tissue determined by the material presence of red brick. Aerial view of Bogota, Colombia.
29. Rogelio Salmona, Las Torres del Parque Housing Complex, Bogota,1968.
30. Bario Bolivar, Bogota Colombia.
31. + 32. Map of Bath, John Wood the younger incorporated 
the Circus and Royal Crescent into his re-design of the urban 
core
33. + 34. The limestone materiality of the Royal Crescent of 
Bath, England, by John Wood II, 1767-75
↳constructed all
from these
Bricks
-- Foto ?

## S. 26

25
1.01
31
32
33
34
Urban Design as Engagement
Materials
bigblacks
↑
5 Limestone Materiality-- continuty
engaying with
Material !

## S. 27

26
1.01
35
Urban Design as Engagement
Climate
35. Vitruvius, diagram of the winds and their effect on the 
layout of the city.
36. Map of porticoes in Bologna, Italy
37. + 38. The Portico system of almost 40 kilometers in 
Bologna, Italy

## S. 28

27
1.01
36
37
38
Urban Design as Engagement
Climate
↓summogehli
all
peticas
ha
humid
Spartic
protection
·frainste
Bologna

## S. 29

28
1.01
39
41
40
Urban Design as Engagement
Climate
39.-41. Montreal city, The city as protection against climate. 
City centre with Place Ville Marie maps of the growth of the 
Indoor City 1962-1989.
youdentgode,ressivg/gisto
underground !
Indoor city !!
&
house
-
/from
nouse
undergraden
Montreal
-> extremeclimateiner/gome

## S. 30

29
1.01
42
43
44
Urban Design as Engagement
Culture
42. Paris, The system of passages in Paris: economic densification of the city and décor for bourgeois life.
43. Principle of passages in the Parisian blocks.
44. A passage in Paris with its bourgeois users.
Paris
Theflancoriantalistic
Passagel
Gallery
life
↑
not
bas
dimat
but
about
·capitalist (
bourgeois
&
culture")
Interior Block
, interior shop
rt
beingpa
·cha
⑧

## S. 31

30
1.01
45
46
Urban Design as Engagement
Culture
45. Cavendish Square in London. Expression of cultural 
norms and forms of collectivity in the city of London.
46. Mogg Map Of London, 1806. Edited to highlight the 
London Squares: Montagu, Portman, Manchester, Grosvenor, Cavendish, Hanover, Golden, Fitzroy, Soho, Bedford, 
Bloomsbury, Russel, Tavistock, Queen, and Brunswick.
/garden
Squares:

## S. 32

31
1.01
47
48
Urban Design as Engagement
Philosophy
47. The checkerboard plan of Piraeus (Athens, Greece, ca 
450 BCE) by the Greek architect Hippodamus of Miletus.
48. Plato’s Πολιτεία (Politeia), written in 380 BCE
organising state
↳should be democratic
I
30BCE !!
Luldea city
~
periphera,
valaches
eq

## S. 33

32
1.01
49
50
52
51
Urban Design as Engagement
Religion
49. Baptist Tilliard, Assomption de Mohammed
50. The first nucleus of the city of Baghdad was the “Round 
City” (Madinat al-Salam) founded by the Abbasid caliph al- 
Mansur in 762 and completed in 766 on the west bank of the 
Tigris in a strategic location in the middle of Mesopotamia.
51. + 52. Baghdad. Original plan, of almost 1km in diameter, followed a defensive scheme with four axial gates while 
the caliph’s domed residence and a congregational mosque 
were located at the centre together with two other administrative buildings, the “police” and the commander of the 
guards. (766)
Bagdad

## S. 34

33
1.01
53
54
Urban Design as Engagement
Religion
53. Jean-Baptiste Tilliard, View of Medina in Saudi Arabia, 
with Al-Nabawi Mosque.
54. Tunis: core of the Medina showing basic planning components. Besim S. Hakim, 1986.
Courtyard Buildings
of religion
↳not disturbingneighbour
- bas

## S. 35

34
1.01
55
56
57
Urban Design as Engagement
Politics
55. Berlin, Flagship building project of East Germany's reconstruction politics: View of Straussberger Platz on Stalinallee (today Karl-Marx-Allee). 1965.
56. + 57. Book cover ‘Die Stalinallee die erste sozialistische 
Straße der Hauptstadt Deutschlands’ (1952) and propaganda poster with Stalinallee in background.
Socialistic urbandesign
-- in contraire
talism
to western capi

## S. 36

35
1.01
58
59
60
Urban Design as Engagement
Politics
58. + 59. Grand design for the city of Chandigarh, Le Corbusier, 1953.
60. Chandigarh. Assembly hall building, Le Corbusier, 1953.
w
King intrag
brea
archy
· up
Ha
urban
plan
-

## S. 37

36
1.01
61 62
63
64
Urban Design as Engagement
Social
61. Barcelona, Enlargement map. Map of the neighborhoods 
of the city of Barcelona and project for its improvements and 
enlargement, Ildefonse Cerdà, 1859.
62. + 63. Typical Barcelona blocks.
64. Ramon Casas i Carbó (1866–1932), La Carga (The Charge) or Barcelona 1902. Despite the title and the 1903 signature, the piece was executed 1899-1900.
Barcelona,sameconditionendiffereneayer
mansade
%

## S. 38

37
1.01
65
66
Urban Design as Engagement
Social
65.+ 66. Meknes. Ville nouvelle by Henri Prost and his team. 
Morocco at the beginning of the 20th century.
Gegensaarcelona
conitean apart-

## S. 39

38
1.01
67
68
Urban Design as Engagement
Economic
67. London. The area of Regent Street as designed by John 
Nash, 1809. Print of The Quadrant, Regent Street, before the 
removal of the colonnade,1880
68. London. Nash’s 'Metropolitan Improvements' from Regent’s Park to Charing Cross.
La
& regent street
d
-
&

## S. 40

39
1.01
69. Plan of the Grands Ensembles around Paris, France
69
Urban Design as Engagement
Economic
-
cheap loropricelay
far away promcity
saccessibily infrastrature
wona

## S. 41

40
1.01
70
71
Urban Design as Engagement
Technical
70. Chicago, Principle of steel construction as applied to skyscrapers.
71. The steel skeleton of The Fair Store (1892-1986), Chicago. under construction showing the steel skeleton.
↳no limitation in height
⑪

## S. 42

41
1.01
72
74
75
73
Urban Design as Engagement
Technical
72. Dessau Törten Estate, Walter Gropius 1926-1928. The plan of the urban settlement emerges from its construction principles.
The houses were built with standardised pieces of concrete, made on site. Likewise the blocks of artificial stone, made from a 
base of the cinder-concrete used for the walls, and the reinforced concrete beams for the slabs were manufactured directly on 
site, in a process similar to that of a production assembly line.
73. - 75. Dessau Törten Estate, Walter Gropius 1926-1928.
prefabrication
!
-C
S
new part

## S. 43

42
1.01
76
78
77
79
Urban Design as Engagement
Art
76. Aprilia, central square of the Citta di fondazione, 1936.
77. Giorgio de Chirico, The Square, 1913.
78. Still of movie. Jean-Luc Godard, 2 ou 3 Choses que je 
sais d'elle, 1967
79. Grand Ensemble Lochères in Sarcelles by the architects 
Henri-Labourdette and Boileau. 1955-1970.
cittadifondation
critique-brashional building
↳
Inspired
/reaction
vestier
The 9 or !
of lasImmigrants
. -

## S. 44

43
1.01
80
81
82
The Project of History and Theory
The City as Experience, Organism and Political Archive
80. - 82. The social and the spatial are understood as an 
organism.

## S. 45

44
1.01
83
83. Camillo Sitte. Der Städte-Bau: Nach Seinen Künstlerischen Grundsatzen: Ein Beitrag Zur Lösung Modernster Fragen Der Architektur Und Monumentalen Plastik Unter Besonderer Beziehung Auf Wien. (1889)
The Project of History and Theory
An Architectural History

## S. 46

45
1.01
84
The Project of History and Theory
An Architectural History
84. Pages from Camillo Sitte. Der Städte-Bau: Nach Seinen 
Künstlerischen Grundsatzen: Ein Beitrag Zur Lösung Modernster Fragen Der Architektur Und Monumentalen Plastik 
Unter Besonderer Beziehung Auf Wien. (1889)

## S. 47

46
1.01
85
The Project of History and Theory
An Architectural History
85. Pages from Camillo Sitte. Der Städte-Bau: Nach Seinen 
Künstlerischen Grundsatzen: Ein Beitrag Zur Lösung Modernster Fragen Der Architektur Und Monumentalen Plastik 
Unter Besonderer Beziehung Auf Wien. (1889)

## S. 48

47
1.01
86
The Project of History and Theory
An Architectural History
86. Pages from Camillo Sitte. Der Städte-Bau: Nach Seinen 
Künstlerischen Grundsatzen: Ein Beitrag Zur Lösung Modernster Fragen Der Architektur Und Monumentalen Plastik 
Unter Besonderer Beziehung Auf Wien. (1889)

## S. 49

48
1.01
87
The Project of History and Theory
An Architectural History
87. Hegemann, Werner, and Peets, Elbert. The American Vitruvius: An Architect's Handbook of Civic Art. (1922)

## S. 50

49
1.01
88
The Project of History and Theory
An Architectural History
88. Hegemann, Werner, and Peets, Elbert. The American Vitruvius: An Architect's Handbook of Civic Art. (1922)

## S. 51

50
1.01
89. + 90. Muratori, Saverio. Studi per una operante storia urbana di Venezia. 1959
89
90
The Project of History and Theory
An Architectural History

## S. 52

51
1.01
91. Rossi, Aldo. L'Architettura della Citta' or The Architecture of the City. Padova: Marsilio, 1966.
91
The Project of History and Theory
An Architectural History
