---
titel: "B2.05-SCRIPT"
quelle: "Studium Andrin (HSLU/ETH)"
datei: "B2.05-SCRIPT.pdf"
seiten: 36
ocr-seiten: 0
tags: [bauwissen, vorlesung]
---

# B2.05-SCRIPT

## S. 2

1
2.05
Reconstructing the City, 
Constructing New Towns 
The destruction of the Second World War in the 
middle of the twentieth century once again raised 
the question of the nature and form of the modern 
city. ‘Reconstruction’ was the slogan of the day! 
For atom-bombed Hiroshima (Japan), beyond 
doubt the most affected place in the entire world, 
an urban reconstruction plan for the entire city 
was developed. The renowned architect Kenzo 
Tange suggested in his design that the heart of 
this new city should be an open Memorial Park, as 
a continuous monument that recalled the barbarities. The emptiness of the city center symbolized 
forever the open wound that the Second World 
War had caused in the city and the world.
The city center of Rotterdam (The Netherlands) 
was largely erased during the Second World War, 
leaving tens of thousands of people without a 
dwelling. For this tabula rasa, the engineers Willem Gerrit Witteveen and Cornelis Van Traa devised an urban reconstruction plan that could rapidly be implemented. However, it was two young 
architects, Jo Van den Broek and Jaap Bakema, 
who introduced a new urban figure in Rotterdam. 
With their design for the so-called Lijnbaan, they 
suggested not only an innovative form of urban 
space, but also a previously-unseen pattern of urbanization which combined the qualities of a traditional street with the modern types of the highrise dwelling and public open space.
As a strategic point along the French coast, the 
port town of Le Havre (France) was also largely 
demolished during the war. The reconstruction 
plans were developed by the esteemed French 
architect Auguste Perret. His design started from 
a modern reinterpretation of the historical European city. In Perret’s urban plans, the traditional 
urban spaces of galleries and squares are combined with new building typologies, such as midrise housing blocks. The materiality of the city was 
also a concern for Perret. Rapid construction in 
reinforced concrete was combined with an unusual attention on texture and detail. 
In Amsterdam (The Netherlands), the Dutch architect Aldo Van Eyck searched for an urban design strategy that could engage with the numerous individual plots that were destroyed in the 
city center, and to reconstruct which the owners 
lacked the financial means. As a member of the 
Municipal Urban Design Department, Van Eyck 
devised a minimal and dispersed urban strategy. 
He proposed inserting children’s play gear into 
the vacant spaces, turning them into a network of 
‘spaces of appearance’ not only for children, but 
for the community at large.
At the same time that old city centers were being reconstructed, the concept of ‘New Towns’ 
emerged. New Towns are self-contained and 
self-governing urban entities built according to a 
detailed plan, usually on an undeveloped stretch 
of land, typically designed to serve a mixture of 
residential, commercial, and industrial needs. 
New Towns offered the citizens (as well as architects and planners) the opportunity to escape 
war-torn cities and start afresh.
The ‘Greater London Plan’ of 1944, prepared by 
Patrick Abercrombie for the Ministry of Town and 
Country Planning, foresaw the development of 
ten New Towns around London. The first of these, 
Stevenage, was designated in 1946, the same 
year that the British Parliament passed the New 
Towns Act. This Act allowed the government to 
designate areas as New Towns, and to pass development control over to New Town Development Corporations. 
Stevenage was conceived as a prototype for future New Towns. It had good road and rail con-

## S. 3

2
2.05
nections, industry to one side of the town, a town 
center, and five distinct neighborhoods, each with 
their own primary school, secondary school, and 
neighborhood center. These neighborhood units 
relied on the Radburn system for their internal 
organization; the backyards of homes faced the 
street (and had vehicular access), while the front 
façades faced each other over common yards.
New Towns soon became a very popular concept, 
not only in the UK, but in many European countries 
that were faced with war-torn and/or overcrowded urban centers, including Sweden. Between 
1945 and 1952, the City of Stockholm, under the 
auspices of Sven Markelius, devised the ‘Generalplan’ for Stockholm’s expansion. The development of the subway played a very important role in 
this plan, as it enabled the creation of New Towns, 
which (in Sweden) were called ‘ABC-towns’—an 
initialism of ‘Arbete, Bostad, och Centrum’ (Working, Housing, and Center). Each of Sweden’s ‘ABC 
Towns’ offered a mix of housing and commercial 
and public services, all grouped around a center 
at a new subway station. One of the best-known 
examples of these ABC-towns around Stockholm 
is Vällingby, which was planned by the Swedish 
CIAM members Bäckstrom & Reinius.
The design of New Towns varied wildly, depending on where the New Town was situated, the area 
of land that was available, the number of people 
that had to be accommodated, etc. To work within 
these constraints, architects, planners, and urban 
designers were often afforded great freedom in 
their design, leading to experimentation in New 
Town development. Cumbernauld New Town (in 
Scotland) is one example where the necessity to 
increase the density of the New Town—due to 
the limited area of land available—led to an experimental layout of its center. It was a multi-level, multifunctional megastructure. However, the 
layout of the housing areas at Cumbernauld New 
Town was, for the most part, still quite conventional, and relied on the Radburn system, like Stevenage. This was not the case in the French New 
Town of Toulouse-le-Mirail, which was designed 
by the architectural firm Candilis-Josic-Woods. 
They organized the New Town around a central 
high-density pedestrian spine that traversed the 
New Town’s three neighborhoods (Belle Fontaine, 
Reynerie, and Mirail). Each of these neighborhoods had its own distinct programmatic mix, and 
each comprised a different mix of housing types.
New Towns were not only built for population resettlement, but also for resource extraction, in tandem with the development of new industries. This 
was the key motivation behind the construction 
of several new towns in Africa, such as the New 
Town of Fria (Guinea), by Michel Ecochard, and 
the New Town of Tema (Ghana), by Constantinos 
Doxiadis. Both were designed to house the workers and employees of new industrial developments nearby, and both offered a range of housing typologies, modulated for different income 
groups. However, the layout of both these New 
Towns is fundamentally different. Contrary to Fria, 
which is quite conventional in its urban layout, 
Tema was designed to encourage and enable linear urban growth.

## S. 4

3
2.05
1. Hiroshima, General Plan for the Reconstruction of the City, with as its new centre the Peace Memorial Park by Kenzo Tange, 1949.
2. Hiroshima, Peace Memorial Park by Kenzo Tange, and its situation within larger green structure of Tokyo, 1949.
3. Hiroshima, Peace Memorial Park by Kenzo Tange, and its situation within larger green structure of Tokyo, 1949.
4. Hiroshima, Sculpture in the Peace Memorial Park by Kenzo Tange, 1949.
5. Hiroshima, Groundplan Museum and Peace Memorial Park by Kenzo Tange, 1949. 
6. Hiroshima, Meeting in Peace Memorial Park by Kenzo Tange, 1949.
1
2
Reconstructing the City
Hiroshima’s Empty Heart

## S. 5

4
2.05
Reconstructing the City
Hiroshima’s Empty Heart
3
5
6
4

## S. 6

5
2.05
Reconstructing the City
Hiroshima’s Empty Heart
7
8
7.+8. Hiroshima, Children’s Library in Peace Memorial Park by Kenzo Tange, 1949.

## S. 7

6
2.05
9. Rotterdam, poster of exhibition in reconstruction of Rotterdam, 1947.
10. Rotterdam, Basisplan for reconstruction in 1946 by Van Traa.
Reconstructing the City
New Centralities in the War-Torn Dutch City
9
10

## S. 8

7
2.05
Reconstructing the City
New Centralities in the War-Torn Dutch City
11
12
13
11.+12. Rotterdam, Lijnbaan, sketch about affinity between different buildings and volumetric plan, 1951 – 1953. 
13. Rotterdam, Lijnbaan by Van den Broek and Bakema, 1951 – 1953.

## S. 9

8
2.05
Reconstructing the City
New Centralities in the War-Torn Dutch City
14
15
14. Rotterdam, Lijnbaan by Van den Broek and Bakema, the relation between living, commerce and street, 1951 – 1953. 
15. Rotterdam, Lijnbaan by Van den Broek and Bakema, the relation between living, commerce and street, 1951 – 1953.

## S. 10

9
2.05
A
B
C
0
2
4
20m
6
8
10
0
50m
25
20
15
10
5
Reconstructing the City
New Centralities in the War-Torn Dutch City
16
17
18
16.-18. Rotterdam, Lijnbaan appartments by Hugh Maaskant and others, 1951 – 1953.

## S. 11

10
2.05
Reconstructing the City
New Centralities in the War-Torn Dutch City
19
20
21
19. Amsterdam emty plot and playground by Aldo van Eyck, 1947 – 1973.
20. Amsterdam play elements by Aldo van Eyck, 1947 – 1973.
21. Amsterdam play element by Aldo van Eyck, 1947 – 1973.

## S. 12

11
2.05
22
23
22. Amsterdam, plan of playground by Aldo van Eyck, 1947 – 1973.
23. Amsterdam view of playground by Aldo van Eyck, 1947 – 1973.
Reconstructing the City
New Centralities in the War-Torn Dutch City

## S. 13

12
2.05
24
25
24. Amsterdam, covered playground by Aldo van Eyck, 1947 – 1973.
25. Amsterdam, realized playgrounds by Aldo van Eyck, 1961.
Reconstructing the City
New Centralities in the War-Torn Dutch City

## S. 14

13
2.05
Reconstructing the City
Reconstruction as a Collective Material Oeuvre
26
27
26. Le Havre, Reconstruction project, general layout by August Perret,1945-1964.
27. Le Havre, Reconstruction project, model with main urban massing, by August Perret,1945-1964.

## S. 15

14
2.05
Reconstructing the City
Reconstruction as a Collective Material Oeuvre
28
29
30
28. Le Havre, Reconstruction project by August Perret,1945-1964.
29. Le Havre, Reconstruction project with new urban blocks by August Perret, 1945-1964.
30. Le Havre, Reconstruction project, relation between city and harbour, 
by August Perret,1945-1964.

## S. 16

15
2.05
Reconstructing the City
Reconstruction as a Collective Material Oeuvre
31
32
31. Le Havre, construction detail by by August Perret,1945-1964.
32. Le Havre, Reconstruction project by August Perret,1945-1964.

## S. 17

16
2.05
Reconstructing the City
Reconstruction as a Collective Material Oeuvre
 
33
34

## S. 18

17
2.05
Reconstructing the City
Reconstruction as a Collective Material Oeuvre
35
36
37
33. Le Havre, galleries in the new urban blocks by August Perret,1945-1964.
34. Le Havre, Reconstruction project by August Perret,1945-1964.
35. Le Havre, Reconstruction project by August Perret,1945-1964.
36. Le Havre, Reconstruction project by August Perret, plan of a 4 room apartment,1945-1964.
37. Le Havre, Reconstruction project by August Perret, interior hallway, 1945-1964.

## S. 19

18
2.05
Reconstructing the City
Reconstruction as a Collective Material Oeuvre
38
39
40
38. Le Havre, Reconstruction project 
by August Perret, design for tower of 
town hall,1945-1964.
39. Le Havre, Reconstruction project 
by August Perret, construction of tiown hall, 1945-1964.
40. Le Havre, Saint-Joseph Church 
by August Perret,1945-1964.

## S. 20

19
2.05
The Midcentury New Town Movement
New Towns for New Industries
41
42
43
41.Fria, an (industrial) new town built by the French company Péchiney / Design of the Fria factory for bauxite 
extraction and aluminium production (owned by Péchiney) 
42.-43. Planning concept and model of central area of Fria New Town

## S. 21

20
2.05
44
45
46
44.- 46. Masterplan of Fria New Town / Plan of the circulation at Fria New Town / System of green zones at Fria New Town 
The Midcentury New Town Movement
New Towns for New Industries

## S. 22

21
2.05
47
48
49
47. -49. Dwelling type A in Fria New Town 
The Midcentury New Town Movement
New Towns for New Industries

## S. 23

22
2.05
50
51
52
53
50.-52. Dwelling type B at Fria New Town, designed by Atelier LWD 
53. Dwelling type C in Fria New Town
54.-55. Overview of sector II in Fria New Town 
The Midcentury New Town Movement
New Towns for New Industries

## S. 24

23
2.05
54
55
The Midcentury New Town Movement
New Towns for New Industries

## S. 25

24
2.05
The Midcentury New Town Movement
New Towns for Regional Development
56. Sir Patrick Abercrombie (1879-1957)
57. The Greater London Plan, 1944 
58. Masterplan Stevenage New Town, 1946 
56
57
58

## S. 26

25
2.05
The Midcentury New Town Movement
New Towns for Regional Development
59.-60. Pin Green neighbourhood, Stevenage
61. Schematic representation of the ‚Radburn system‘
59
61
60

## S. 27

26
2.05
62
63
64
62. Neighbourhood centres in Stevenage 
63. Dancing Figures’ by Dick Fowler at Pin Green 
64. ’Joyride’ by Franta Belsky at Stevenage’s town centre 
The Midcentury New Town Movement
New Towns for Regional Development

## S. 28

27
2.05
65
66
67
The Midcentury New Town Movement
New Towns for Regional Development
65. Stevenage Town Centre Plan 
66.-67. 
Stevenage 
Town 
Centre: 
Queensway shopping street, Town 
Centre Square

## S. 29

28
2.05
The Midcentury New Town Movement
New Towns for Regional Development
68
69
70
68. Sven Markelius (1889-1972) 
69. ‘ABC’ New Town scheme
70. ABC new Towns around Stockholm

## S. 30

29
2.05
The Midcentury New Town Movement
New Towns for Regional Development
71
73
72
74
71. Vällingby New Town by Bäckstrom & Reinius 
72.-74. Vällingby New Town Centre

## S. 31

30
2.05
75
77
78
76
The Midcentury New Town Movement
New Towns for Regional Development
75. Vällingby New Town Centre 
76. Vällingby New Town Centre and surrounding housing 
77.-78. Housing in the Hässelby Gård neighbourhood of Vällingby

## S. 32

31
2.05
The Midcentury New Town Movement
A New Generation of New Towns
79
80
79. Cumbernauld outline plan, 1958 
80. Cumbernauld outline model of its central area

## S. 33

32
2.05
81
82
81.-82. Town centre of Cumbernauld New Town 
The Midcentury New Town Movement
A New Generation of New Towns

## S. 34

33
2.05
83
84
83. Phase 1 of Cumbernauld new town centre, approach from the south, circa 1963
84. Cumbernauld approached from the neighbourhood of Carbrain 
The Midcentury New Town Movement
A New Generation of New Towns

## S. 35

34
2.05
85
86
87
85.-86. Housing estates at Kildrum in Cumbernauld 
87. Civic facilities in Kildrum: School by Gillespie, Kidd & Coia 
The Midcentury New Town Movement
A New Generation of New Towns

## S. 36

35
2.05
Further reading:
- 
Avermaete, Tom, and Janina Gosseye. Urban Design in the 20th Century : a History. Zürich: gta Verlag, 2021.
Chapter 4: Reconstructing the City, Constructing New Towns
- 
Britton, Karla. Auguste Perret. London: Phaidon, 2003. 
- 
Hein, Carola. „Hiroshima: The Atomic Bomb and Kenzo Tange‘s Hiroshima Peace Center.“ Out of Ground 
Zero / Temple Hoyne Buell Center for the Study of American Architecture. Ed. by Joan Ockman. (2002): 62-83. 
- 
Lefaivre, Liane, Rudi Fuchs, and Ingeborg . Roode. Aldo Van Eyck: The Playgrounds and the City. Rotterdam: NAI Publishers, 2002. 
- 
Rosemary Wakeman. Practicing Utopia: An Intellectual History of the New Town Movement. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2016.
- 
Van den Heuvel, Dirk (ed.) Jaap Bakema and the Open Society. Amsterdam: Archis Publishers, 2017.
Sources Images:
-Britton, Karla. Auguste Perret. London: Phaidon, 
2003. 
-Hein, Carola. „Hiroshima: The Atomic Bomb and 
Kenzo Tange‘s Hiroshima Peace Center.“ Out of 
Ground Zero / Temple Hoyne Buell Center for the 
Study of American Architecture. Ed. by Joan Ockman. (2002): 62-83. 
-Lefaivre, Liane, Rudi Fuchs, and Ingeborg . Roode. Aldo Van Eyck: The Playgrounds and the City. 
Rotterdam: NAI Publishers, 2002. 
-Van den Heuvel, Dirk (ed.) Jaap Bakema and 
the Open Society. Amsterdam: Archis Publishers, 
2017.
Dates and Facts
1939 
 
German invasion of Poland, start of World War II
1940 
 
Bombing of Rotterdam
1940 
 
First Reconstruction Plan of Rotterdam by Witteveen
1944 
 
Bombing of Le Havre
1944 
 
Greater London Plan, Patrick Abercrombie (UK)
1945 
 
Atomic bombing of Hiroshima
1945 
Surrender of Imperial Japan, end of World War II
1945 
 
Reconstruction project for Le Havre by Perret
1946 
New Towns Act (UK)
1946 
Designation of Stevenage New Town, the first British New Town
1947 
 
Playground project by Aldo van Eyck
1951 
 
De Lijnbaan Rotterdam by Van den Broek and Bakema
1952 
Stockholm Generalplan, Sven Markelius (Sweden)
1954 
 
Designation of Vällingby New Town, ABC New Town outside Stockholm
1956-64 
Fria New Town by Michel Ecochard
