---
titel: "B2.01-SCRIPT"
quelle: "Studium Andrin (HSLU/ETH)"
datei: "B2.01-SCRIPT.pdf"
seiten: 8
ocr-seiten: 0
tags: [bauwissen, vorlesung]
---

# B2.01-SCRIPT

## S. 2

1
2.01
The Long 20th Century
and Its Challenges
Widespread urbanization, which is today evident 
around the globe, is largely a twentieth-century 
phenomenon. While previously the world population 
had been largely rural, things started to change in 
Europe and North America during the nineteenth 
century. Technological advancement and the 
availability of vast energy supplies dovetailed 
to propel urban development. With the rise of 
agricultural machinery, farmers needed fewer hands, 
and workers were driven to the city. At the same 
time, the rise of industry created numerous jobs in 
the countless factories in the city. This development 
eventually led to the emergence of large cities, 
sometimes called Großstädte or metropolises, which 
appeared as economic and cultural centers.
The growth of cities continued in the second half of 
the twentieth century, and increased dramatically in 
the non-Western world (especially in Asia, Africa, 
and South America). This second major wave of 
urbanization differed from the Western urbanization 
of the nineteenth and early twentieth century. Urban 
growth was stronger and faster, but the triggers 
were also different—many people were driven to 
cities because of war, insecurity, crop failures, and 
the effects of climate change, such as droughts 
and floods. While in 1900 fewer than 14% of the 
world’s population lived in cities, at the end of the 
twentieth century about 46% inhabited urban areas. 
Accordingly, the twenty-first century is already 
known as the ‘urban age’.
Against this background, it should come as no 
surprise that the long twentieth century is also the 
era in which the profession of urban design became 
widespread and professionalized. In the early 
decades of the twentieth century, the urban design 
profession developed in response to the appalling 
sanitary, social, and economic conditions of rapidlygrowing industrial cities. From the very beginning, 
it was not just architects and engineers who were 
at the core of this new professional field, but also 
public health specialists, economists, sociologists, 
lawyers, and geographers. From an interdisciplinary 
synthesis of all these different fields, new approaches 
and tools for urban analysis and design were 
developed in the course of the twentieth century.
The Perennial Engagement with Housing and 
Public Space
In the twentieth century, as before, urban design was 
confronted with two perennial challenges: providing 
housing and public space. As the world population 
grew throughout the twentieth century, so too did 
dwelling aspirations and needs. As a result, the 
question of affordable housing remained a major 
concern for urban design throughout the century. 
Similarly, the question of public space remained 
an important urban design challenge during the 
twentieth century, and several new models of public 
space were developed and tested. Urban designers 
moved away from the more conventional forms 
of public space—such as streets, squares, and 
galleries—to more open, green, and landscapeoriented figures of public space. 
The Second Industrial Revolution: 
Prefabrication, Automobility and 
Mass Consumption 
The twentieth century also saw many new issues and 
challenges emerging, which elicited reactions from 
urban designers and architects. The century started 
in the midst of what the Scottish town planner Patrick 
Geddes, in his book, Cities in Evolution (1915), 
called the ‘Second Industrial Revolution’. Also known 
as the Technological Revolution, this period began 
with the development of the Bessemer process for 
the large-scale production of steel in the 1860s, and 
culminated in the emergence of mass production 
and the production line in the first decades of the 
twentieth century.
The 
Second 
Industrial 
Revolution 
brought 
accelerated industrial development in Western 
Europe (particularly in Great Britain, Germany, 
France, the Low Countries, and Denmark), the 
Walter Gropius. Baukasten im Grossen (Big Construction 
Kit) for prefabrication of housing. Source: Bauhausbücher 3, 
Ein Versuchshaus des Bauhauses Weimar. 1924.

## S. 3

2
2.01
The Long 20th Century and 
Its Challenges
United States, and Japan. While the First Industrial 
Revolution focused on iron, steam technologies, 
and textile production, the Second revolved around 
steel, railways, electricity, and chemicals—all of 
which would have a great impact on architecture 
and the city. 
The Second Industrial Revolution also saw the 
development of management theories, such as 
Taylorism. Defined by the American engineer 
Frederick Taylor in his book, The Principles of 
Scientific Management (1911), this was an attempt to 
unravel the production process and introduce a farreaching rationalization. Such ideas of rationalized 
production would soon also be projected onto 
the building process, and became part of the 
rhetoric of modern architects and urban designers. 
‘Prefabrication’ and ‘standardization’ would become 
key slogans for the production of the city in the first 
half of the twentieth century. 
One of the most important mass-produced products 
was the car. During the first part of the twentieth 
century, automobile ownership became increasingly 
generalized in several parts of the world. The 
American Ford Model T was the first mass produced 
car. Between 1908 and 1927, more than 15 million 
Model Ts, popularly known as ‘Tin Lizzies’, were 
built. The car posed completely new demands on 
the qualities of roads, changed the scale of streets, 
and led to new techniques of road paving in asphalt 
and concrete. It also necessitated the construction 
of new spaces in cities such as petrol stations, 
garages, and parking lots. 
Mass production, combined with an increase in 
automobility, also spurred mass consumption and 
mass distribution throughout the twentieth century. 
New places, such as the self-service supermarket, 
the shopping mall, and the mass distribution center, 
emerged in the urban territory.
World Wars, and the Reconstruction of the City
The twentieth century also witnessed two World 
Wars. The First World War, sometimes also called 
the Great War, left an estimated 16 million people 
dead, and countless others wounded. It also 
cut a path of destruction across Europe, leaving 
centuries-old towns in ruins. The question, ‘How to 
rebuild buildings and cities with respect for the past, 
but using the technologies of the present’, became 
a major concern for architects and urban designers, 
as well as for politicians. Twenty-two years later, the 
Second World War commenced. Likewise, a large 
number of cities were again destroyed, not only in 
Europe, but also beyond, most notably the Japanese 
city of Hiroshima.
The Urban Symbolism of the Cold War
Another important condition that characterized 
the twentieth century was the so-called Cold War. 
This was a period of armed peace between the 
Communist and Capitalist worlds in the second half 
of the century. The capitalist western block was led 
by the United States, while the communists were 
mainly steered by the Soviet Union, or connected 
to communist China. The term ‘Cold War’ refers to 
a battle in which the weapons remain cold. There 
was never any direct military encounter between the 
United States and the Soviet Union itself. Battles were 
fought as ‘wars-by-proxy’, for example the Vietnam 
War, which was a conflict between the United States, 
the Soviet Union, and communist China, fought on 
Vietnamese territory. Attacks were also launched 
symbolically, via radio, TV, and propaganda, but 
also through the design of buildings and cities. 
The symbolic importance of architecture in the 
geopolitical struggle of the Cold War became clear 
in 1959. During the grand opening ceremony of 
the American National Exhibition in Moscow, Vice 
President Richard Nixon and Soviet leader Nikita 
Khrushchev engaged in a heated debate about 
capitalism and communism in the middle of a model 
kitchen set up for the fair. This so-called ‘kitchen 
Henry Ford installs the first moving assembly line for the 
mass production of an entire automobile in 1913.
Destruction of Hiroshima, August 6, 1945. 
Source: Stanley Troutman (photographer).

## S. 4

3
2.01
The Long 20th Century and 
Its Challenges
debate’ became one of the most famous episodes 
of the Cold War. 
Symbolic struggles were also fought at the 
level of urban planning. One of the best-known 
confrontations took place in Germany, where 
grand urban projects such as the neo-classical 
Stalinallee in East Berlin (Henselmann, Hartmann, 
Hopp, Leucht, Paulick, and Souradny, 1952–60) 
were countered in West Berlin, on the other side 
of the Berlin Wall, with the modernist experimental 
architecture of the Congreshalle (Hugh Stubbins, 
1956), which symbolized the German–American 
alliance.
Urban Projects, 
Democratization and Emancipation
Though the ideas were not new, processes of 
increased emancipation and self-determination 
would characterize the twentieth century and affect 
the field of urban design. How to define the role of 
a free and independent citizen in the design and 
realization of the city? Throughout the twentieth 
century, the agency of citizens in the production of 
the city were continuously explored and redefined; 
from Le Corbusier’s ‘Dom-Ino’ project of 1914, for 
the reconstruction of Belgium after the First World 
War, to John Habraken’s principle of ‘Support and 
Infill’ (1961), for mass housing in The Netherlands.
The call for democracy and social equality, originally 
launched in the nineteenth century, also grew 
stronger during the twentieth century. After the 
introduction of universal suffrage, in most European 
countries between 1918 and 1920, several domains 
of society—including education and culture—were 
democratized. In many countries, in Europe and 
beyond, this also resulted in new building programs 
for the masses. In the field of education, large 
universities were added to urban territories. In the 
field of culture, not only cultural centers, but also 
numerous low-threshold museums, were opened for 
the masses—with emblematic urban projects such 
as the Centre Pompidou in Paris (Rogers and Piano, 
1977), and the Museu de Arte (MASP) in São Paulo 
(Lina Bo Bardi, 1968).
From ‘Steel Belt’ to ‘Rust Belt’: 
Deindustrialization and Urban Terrains Vagues
As the twentieth century evolved, a third industrial 
revolution emerged, which no longer focused on 
hard industries, but which was based on knowledge 
and communication technologies. Simultaneously, 
production sites were rapidly moved to places 
around the globe, following the availability of cheap 
labor. As a result, the built environments that were 
initially erected to serve the Second Industrial 
Revolution fell into disuse. This was for instance the 
case for the American ‘Steel Belt’, which became a 
‘Rust Belt’, but also for the large empty factory sites 
in the German Ruhr area, and the cotton mills in the 
Indian city of Mumbai. Deindustrialization processes 
not only led to urban decay in formerly prosperous 
cities, but also created vast vacant sites (factories, 
coal mines, harbors) which appeared as terrains 
vagues in the urban territory, and posed a serious 
challenge for urban design. 
Limits to Growth: 
Environmental Concerns and the City
From the mid-twentieth century, environmental 
awareness became an important issue. In 1962, the 
American biologist Rachel Carson published her 
influential book, Silent Spring, in which she accused 
the chemical industry of spreading disinformation 
on the adverse environmental effects caused by 
the indiscriminate use of pesticides. A decade 
later, a report, “The Limits to Growth: A Global 
Challenge” (1972), by the so-called Club of Rome, 
critically addressed unbridled industrialization and 
urbanization. It depicted a future in which natural 
resources would gradually become depleted, 
while pollution continued to increase, with serious 
effects on the health of people. These environmental 
concerns soon spurred countercultural reactions. 
Grassroots movements and groups emerged 
July 24, 1959: Richard Nixon and Nikita Khrushchev, 
“The Kitchen Debate.”
Donella H. Meadows et al. Limits to Growth. 1972.

## S. 5

4
2.01
The Long 20th Century and 
Its Challenges
that sought alternative ways of doing, which also 
transpired in the field of urban design, where new 
approaches were tested based on a different 
attitude to natural and human resources.
Urban Design Reactions in a 
Global Perspective
The discipline of urban design was faced with 
responding to these different challenges; both 
to the perennial questions of housing and public 
space, and to new and emerging issues, such as 
the necessity for reconstruction (following two World 
Wars), the trend towards democratization, growing 
ecological concerns, etc. On the basis of these 
responses, different historical narratives can be told. 
In this course—Global History of Urban Design II—
one such narrative is brought to light.
This narrative situates the history of urban design 
in a heteronomous perspective. It maintains 
that urban design was strongly affected by the 
aforementioned economic, political, social, and 
cultural developments. At the same time, it also 
demonstrates that urban design can be looked 
upon as an autonomous discipline that develops 
according to its own internal logics. The reinvention 
of the grid as an urban planning tool, from 
Hippodamus in Ancient Greece to Cerda in the 
nineteenth century and Koolhaas in the twentieth 
century, is a good example. This course thus holds 
that the history of urban design needs to be looked 
upon as both a heteronomous and an autonomous 
matter simultaneously.
This course chooses to recount the history of urban 
design from a global perspective. The narrative 
is anchored in Europe, but includes references to 
responses that were formulated elsewhere across 
the globe. Intentionally, it often focuses on places that 
are nearby, such as the cities and urban territories of 
Europe. However, at the same time, we want to raise 
awareness that the occurrences that we encounter 
in these well-known European cities cannot be seen 
as disconnected from other urban realities that are 
far away. Therefore, it also includes numerous urban 
design references and case-studies from other parts 
of the globe.
Housing and the Industrial City: 
From Speculative to Cooperative
Around the turn of the twentieth century, rapid 
industrialization brought on by the Second Industrial 
Revolution transformed cities around the globe. As 
industry moved into urban centers, so too did hordes 
of laborers, all in search of job opportunities. With 
this large influx of people, one of the most pressing 
questions that the discipline of urban design was 
faced with at the start of the twentieth century was 
how best to house these masses of workers. In 
many cities, this responsibility was initially left to the 
market, and resulted in different (yet comparable) 
speculative housing types, such as the chawl 
(Mumbai, India), the blockrand (Zürich, Switzerland), 
the tenement house (New York, United States), and 
the mietkaserne (Berlin, Germany). What these have 
in common is that they are all multiple dwelling types 
with small rooms, often resulting in crowded and 
unhygienic conditions. In response to this housing 
crisis, enlightened business owners and architects 
developed utopian models for ideal workers’ towns 
and industrial cities. A notable example is Tony 
Garnier’s ‘Cité Industrielle’ of 1914, which presented 
a utopian industrial city for 35,000 inhabitants. 
Around this time, citizens also increasingly began 
organizing themselves through the establishment of 
housing cooperatives, which built entire new urban 
fragments—or Siedlungen—commonly at the edges 
of urban centers. By the 1920s, then, governments, 
particularly in Europe, became increasingly involved 
in providing housing for workers. The most famous 
example is the Gemeindebauten program that Karl 
Seitz, the Mayor of Vienna, set up in the mid-1920s, 
which became one of the strongest and most visible 
manifestations of the so-called ‘Red Vienna’.
Frankfurt. Siedlung Römerstadt,1927-1928. By Ernst May 
and Leberecht Migge.
Cité Industrielle, 1899-1917. By Tony Garnier.

## S. 6

5
2.01
The Long 20th Century and 
Its Challenges
Cities and Ideologies: Building for Healthy Minds 
in Healthy Bodies
Throughout the twentieth century, housing growing 
urban populations remained a pressing question, 
and the urban design schemes that were developed 
in response were often heavily influenced by 
their local socio-political contexts. This was very 
evident in the 1920s and 1930s, when socialist and 
communist ideologies became key driving forces in 
urban design in large parts of Europe and Russia. 
For instance, in 1925, an ambitious public housing 
program was set up in Frankfurt, called Das Neue 
Frankfurt. The aim of this initiative was to provide 
decent accommodation for the masses that would 
allow them to enjoy a minimum of modern comforts 
in direct contact with nature, at a rental price that 
everyone could afford. In this lecture, a spectrum 
is shown which moves from such benign modes of 
ideology-driven urban design (as can be observed 
in Das Neue Frankfurt) to more oppressive (and 
megalomaniac) urban schemes that emerged in the 
1930s under Nationalsozialismus in Germany and 
Stalinism in Russia. A key example is the “General 
Plan for the Reconstruction of Moscow” that was 
proposed in 1935 during the reign of Stalin, who 
imagined a grand Palace of the Soviets with an 
associated (and monumental) Boulevard of the 
Palace of the Soviets at its heart.
Envisioning Urban Utopias
Although dark forces were looming in Europe (i.e., 
the rise of the Third Reich), the interwar period was 
nevertheless a time of optimism. The First World 
War was over, and a bright new future that offered 
limitless possibilities lay ahead. In this context, 
architects and urban designers produced a set of 
utopian schemes that all visibly sought to break 
away from the past by negating existing urban forms 
and models. Such schemes were founded on the 
belief that by remaking the city, a new society could 
be formed. Le Corbusier’s “Ville Contemporaine” 
(1922), for instance, set out to ‘kill the street’ in favor 
of placing buildings in a continuous landscape, 
that at the same time was strictly zoned and also 
introduced the separation of traffic. On the other 
side of the Atlantic, Frank Lloyd Wright proffered 
an entirely different urban utopia—or rather an 
‘anti-urban’ utopia. Following his ‘Broadacre City’ 
scheme of 1932, each American citizen was to be 
given a one-acre (0.4 hectare) plot of land from the 
US federal land reserves, on which they could grow 
their own food and become self-sufficient. Wright 
thus hoped to transform the United States into a 
nation of independent farmers and proprietors.
Reconstructing the City, 
Constructing New Towns
The end of the Second World War presented a 
chance to start realizing some of the utopian ideas 
that had been formulated during the interwar years. 
As a result, at this time, different urban design 
approaches emerged that all sought to symbolize 
the longed-for ‘fresh start’ and expressed a desire 
to rebuild society along egalitarian and democratic 
lines. With many historic urban centers in ruins, 
discussions focused particularly on the ‘heart of the 
city’, and revolved around the question of what a new 
urban ‘heart’, expressing egalitarian and democratic 
values, would look like. A strong response to this 
question was formulated by Kenzo Tange, who 
redesigned the urban core of Hiroshima, which had 
been destroyed by the atomic bomb ‘Little Boy’ on 
August 6th, 1945. Tange designed an empty and 
green heart, which on the one hand symbolized 
the gaping wound that the conflict had left, and on 
the other represented the anticipated openness of 
Japan’s new post-war society. 
At the same time, architects and urban designers 
also turned away from these war-wrecked urban 
centers and sought the opportunity to really start 
anew, through the construction of entire ‘New Towns’. 
New Towns were built across the globe from the midtwentieth century, and were designed to offer the 
full complement of urban functions—housing, work, 
leisure, commerce, culture, education, etc.—in an 
Broadacre City, 1958. By Frank Lloyd Wright.
Hiroshima, Peace Memorial Park,1955. By Kenzo Tange.

## S. 7

6
2.01
The Long 20th Century and 
Its Challenges
ideal urban configuration. As no consensus existed 
amongst architects and urban designers as to what 
such an ‘ideal’ urban configuration might look like, 
the construction of New Towns resulted in extensive 
experimentation. One of the most notable examples 
of New Town development is the “Greater London 
Plan” of 1944 that Patrick Abercrombie prepared for 
the Ministry of Town and Country Planning, which 
foresaw the development of ten New Towns around 
London, the first of which was Stevenage.
New Capitals for New Democracies;
New Institutions for Old Democracies
The experience of war, and the desire for a fresh 
start—for a more democratic and egalitarian postwar society—continued to play a role during the 
1950s and 1960s. In Asia and Africa, it led to a wave 
of decolonization, and impelled newly established 
independent regimes to build new capital cities that 
would symbolize their freedom and autonomy. For 
instance, in 1947, following the independence of 
Pakistan and India, Jawaharlal Nehru, the President 
of India, decided that the state of Punjab should be 
given a new capital, and commissioned a team of 
architects, including Le Corbusier, Pierre Jeanneret, 
Maxwell Fry, and Jane Drew, to design this new capital 
city for India’s free citizens. At the same, the desire 
for equality also changed the face of Europe’s (old) 
urban fabric. The (egalitarian) belief that everyone 
should be able to live in welfare spread across 
the continent, as governments increasingly took it 
upon themselves to assure a fair (re)distribution of 
wealth and to guarantee equal access to formative 
opportunities, such as education, leisure, and 
culture. This resulted in massive building programs 
for education, leisure, and culture, and also led to 
the emergence of new (institutional) building types, 
such as the cultural center, a prime example of 
which is the Kulturhuset by Peter Celsing (1966–71) 
in inner-city Stockholm. 
Rethinking Masterplanning
The efforts to reconstruct cities after the War, often 
at a very high speed, had led to the proliferation 
of top-down urban planning and design, which 
commonly relied heavily on methods of industrial 
production and prefabrication. From the 1960s, this 
mode of urban planning was increasingly criticized. 
Its detractors claimed that this top-down and 
industrialized urban planning approach had resulted 
in monotonous and alienating urban environments 
that were devoid of life. In response, different, more 
humanistic, and growth-driven approaches to urban 
design emerged that sought to bring people into the 
equation—sometimes quite literally—and that also 
debunked the myth that one overall, finite masterplan 
could be drawn for a city or neighborhood. Instead, 
these new urban design approaches favored growth 
and indeterminacy. For instance, the Dutch architect 
John Habraken developed a system of ‘support 
and infill’ which gave people a stake in the design, 
while in Japan Kenzo Tange developed the concept 
of ‘metabolism’, which put forward the hypothesis 
that the city is a constantly evolving organism that 
is made up of different elements with different lifecycles. 
Countercultural Experiments with Urbanity
While 
the 
aforementioned 
alternatives 
to 
masterplanning questioned top-down urban design 
and modes of industrial production, they still operated 
within a welfare state frame. This means that these 
designs did not question the belief that governments 
should take responsibility for the overall welfare of 
citizens. Or, to put it differently, they did not question 
the premise of (paternalistic) state control over how 
people lived, only the way in which urban design 
responded to it. However, during the 1960s and 
1970s, people did start opposing this established 
system. A drive towards greater freedom (from 
government control) led to the emergence of strong 
countercultural movements, which addressed both 
social and ecological concerns. At this time, many 
architects and urban designers began developing 
utopian schemes that proposed new urban 
models for a free society. Notable in this respect 
Chandigarh. A plan for the new capital of Punjab, 1952. By 
Le Corbusier.
Instant City, 1968-1970. By Archigram.

## S. 8

7
2.01
The Long 20th Century and 
Its Challenges
is Constant’s ‘New Babylon’, a labyrinthine urban 
space for the homo ludens—man at play—who is 
invited to perpetually invent and reinvent his/her 
environment. Although Constant’s ‘New Babylon’ 
was never realized, a few noteworthy countercultural 
urban schemes were built. For instance, Paolo 
Soleri, who was preoccupied with the need to build 
in a way that was more sensitive to the environment, 
devised the concept of ‘arcology’—a portmanteau 
of ‘architecture’ and ‘ecology’—and began testing 
this concept in ‘Arcosanti’, an entirely new urban 
settlement in the Sonora Desert in Arizona (US), from 
the early 1970s.
Finding Meaning in the Postmodern City
The growing critique of urban masterplanning 
that first emerged in the 1960s, and the resulting 
realization that the city cannot be planned as a 
whole (in a top-down manner), led to a distrust 
of ‘grand narratives’. For decades, modernist 
architects and urban designers had been trying to 
find an ideal urban model, which (quite ironically) 
led to the realization that no such model exists. 
There was no one size fits all. This insight resulted 
in a ‘splintering’ in the discipline, as architects 
and urban designers began looking in different 
directions for inspiration. Aspects such as history 
and context, which were once shunned by modern 
architects and urban designers intent on turning 
over a new leaf to express the renewal of society 
after the war, were now reintroduced, as can be 
seen in the work of Vittorio Gregotti and Léon Krier. 
But inspiration was also sought elsewhere, as is 
shown in the work of Robert Venturi and Denise-
Scott Brown, who turned to popular culture, and 
the proposals by Rem Koolhaas, who penned a 
manifesto for super-urbanism that launched a plea 
to look at the metropolis for inspiration. This aversion 
to grand narratives also brought about a withdrawal 
from the social mission of architecture and urban 
design. By the 1980s, many architects and urban 
designers no longer saw their work as instrumental in 
building a more democratic and egalitarian society. 
Instead, they embraced the logics (and excesses) 
of economic liberalism—‘form follows finance’, 
rather than ‘form follows function’—and accepted 
the ‘Collage City’ (a patchwork of urban fragments) 
as a new conceptual approach.
Open-ended Strategies for Imploding Cities 
From the 1980s, many cities across the globe 
experienced a process of deindustrialization. As 
urban ports, railway yards, industrial compounds, 
and slaughterhouses were vacated, an urban 
‘implosion’ occurred. At this time, different modes 
and strategies of urban design were formulated 
in an attempt to rethink such post-industrial urban 
voids. One popular approach was the ‘Projet 
Urbain’ (the Urban Project); a punctual mode of 
urban design focused on strategic nodes in the 
urban fabric that (for their redevelopment) required 
close collaboration between different actors and 
stakeholders. One of the most famous ‘Projets 
Urbain’ is the project of Les Halles in Paris, for 
which numerous design proposals were developed 
over a long period of time. This project beautifully 
demonstrates the aforementioned departure from 
the belief that a final blueprint can be made for the 
city. Instead, the ‘Projet Urbain’ that was formulated 
for Les Halles set in motion an open-ended urban 
design dialogue between various actors through 
time. Another mode of urban design that emerged 
in response to the late twentieth century urban 
implosion was ‘landscape urbanism’. Supporters 
of this new mode of urban design suggested that 
landscape should supplant architecture’s historic 
role as the basic building block of urban form, as 
it is better to suited to the contemporary urban 
condition, which is determined by open-endedness, 
indeterminacy, and change. One of the earliest, 
and most paradigmatic, examples of landscape 
urbanism is Bernard Tschumi’s design for the Parc 
de la Villette (in Paris), which introduced a robust 
landscape system of points, lines, and planes on 
the former slaughterhouse site, within which change 
can occur.
Berlin, Schützenstrasse City Block, 1977. By Aldo Rossi.
Paris, Les Halles Architectural Competition, 1968.
