---
titel: "B2.02-SCRIPT"
quelle: "Studium Andrin (HSLU/ETH)"
datei: "B2.02-SCRIPT.pdf"
seiten: 39
ocr-seiten: 0
tags: [bauwissen, vorlesung]
---

# B2.02-SCRIPT

## S. 2

1
2.02
Housing and the Industrial City: 
From Speculative to Cooperative
Speculative Housing for Workers
The Second Industrial Revolution had a major impact on the architecture of the city. Following advancements in manufacturing and production technologies, extensive rail networks were constructed 
across the globe, which not only facilitated the 
movement of goods, but also engendered an unprecedented movement of people, culminating in a 
new wave of globalization. Workers, both skilled and 
unskilled, descended on urban centers, which were 
soon faced with problems of congestion. Particularly 
pressing was the question of housing this enormous 
labor force. In many places, housing the masses of 
workers was (initially) unregulated. Around the turn 
of the twentieth century, workers were often housed 
in privately-developed (speculatively-built) multipledwelling typologies. 
The chawls in the Indian city of Mumbai are a good 
example. With the growth in the textile economy, 
Mumbai experienced a surge of migrants from the 
hinterland, who came to work in the cotton mills and 
live in the city. As the city was unable to accommodate the housing needs of these migrant workers, 
mill owners responded by creating new housing, socalled ‘chawls’, on plots in the vicinity of the mills. 
Chawls were typically four- to five-story buildings 
that had eight to sixteen single occupancy rooms 
next to each other on a particular floor, with shared 
latrines. Most chawls had an inner courtyard with a 
wide, gallery-like balcony. From the end of the nineteenth century, chawls would become an important 
constituent element of the city. In 1911, approximately 80% of Mumbai’s population lived in chawls.
The question of housing for workers was also high 
on the urban agenda in the Swiss city of Zürich. 
Though the city lacked large-scale industry, many 
smaller factories developed in the late nineteenth 
century in areas like Aussersihl, Widiekon, Wipkingen, and Altstadt. Housing the workers within an 
accessible distance to their working place would 
lead to the emergence of the so-called ‘blockrand’ 
typology in these industrial districts. The blockrand 
was a perimeter block. Though the dwellings were 
small (often a single room), and the courtyards filled 
with small workshops and storage spaces, several 
blockrand buildings together constituted an urban 
model with no less than 44% open space. Propelled by the Baugesetz (Building Law) of 1893, the 
privately-commissioned blockrand buildings would 
become the most important component of the urban 
development of Zürich in the late nineteenth and the 
very beginning of the twentieth century.
The textile and clothing industries, often in the form 
of small manufactories and sweatshops, had an important presence in the American city of New York 
in the early twentieth century. The question of how 
to house the workers of these different industries 
would become an important concern. As a result of 
the Commissioner’s Plan of 1811, which installed the 
well-known Manhattan grid, the city was composed 
of large urban perimeter blocks. Workers were typically housed at the edges of these urban blocks in 
so-called ‘tenement houses’, in which multiple families commonly occupied flats that had been intended 
for one family. The result was overly crowded, dark, 
and poorly-ventilated living quarters. The New York 
Tenement House Act of 1911 would try to correct 
this condition. In this Act, the government was not 
taking direct responsibility for housing the workers, 
but imposed regulations (standards of light, ventilation) on new developments by the private sector, 
thus improving the model of the tenement house.
Visionary Towns for Companies and Industries
In some cases, companies took it upon themselves 
to provide housing for their workers. A famous example is Port Sunlight, close to the industrial town of 
Liverpool in the United Kingdom. This model village, 
commissioned by Lever Brothers to accommodate 
the workers from its soap factory, derived its name 
from the most popular brand of cleaning agent: Sunlight. The village was not only understood as a way 
to provide dwelling space, but also aimed to “to so-

## S. 3

2
2.02
cialise and Christianise business relations and get 
back to that close family brotherhood that existed in 
the good old days of hand labour”, as William Lever 
explained.
Lever personally initiated the plan of the village, 
which was subsequently developed by the father 
and son architects, William and Segar Owen. The 
overall layout of Port Sunlight followed the imperatives of the marshy terrain on which the village was 
set. Around the large water surfaces, semi-detached 
houses with relatively large allotment gardens were 
designed. This complied with the idea that labor on 
the land was a healthy change from work in the factory. The village was also punctuated with multiple 
urban spaces for recreation and sports, including 
football and cricket grounds, a tennis lawn, a bowling green, and play areas, as well as a gymnasium 
and an open-air swimming pool. The idea was that 
that these collective provisions would not only produce healthy and happy employees, but also promote harmony across the entire workforce. 
The first twenty-eight houses (1889–90) were developed by William and Segar Owen. The entire design 
of Port Sunlight, between 1899 and 1914, however, 
would involve nearly thirty different architects and 
result in 800 houses for 3,500 people. In order to 
allow these different architects to intervene and still 
maintain the idea of a consistent village, a code of 
style and materials was established. Port Sunlight 
was planned to be designed in a Tudor Revival style, and the pallet of materials was limited to seven: 
“brick (Ruabon), roughcast (grey, white, or yellow), 
tile, slate, beams (brown or green), plaster (white) 
and sandstone (red)”.
Port Sunlight was conceived as a self-contained village, which could provide the Lever Brothers employees with all necessary educational, social, and 
cultural amenities for themselves and their families. 
As a result, the urban design also included important civic buildings such as two schools, collective 
dining facilities, a church, an art gallery, and a country club. These buildings also introduced centers in 
the various parts of the village, and offered collective spaces where employees of every level could 
meet and mingle. Port Sunlight’s integral conception 
of how to provide good living conditions for workers 
was hailed by Ebenezer Howard, the renowned British planner, who described it as a “most admirably 
planned industrial village”. As a result of his experiences at Port Sunlight, William Lever would in 1909 
become one of the initiators of the Department of Civic Design at Liverpool University: the country’s first 
town planning department.
Architects also actively developed proposals—often ideal or utopian solutions—for the housing problem. For instance, in the early 1900s, inspired by 
the writings of Émile Zola—notably his novel, Travail 
(Labor)—the French architect and urban planner, 
Tony Garnier, proposed a ‘Cité Industrielle’. Garnier 
began working on this project in 1901, and published his proposal in 1917. Inspired by utopian-socialist foundations, the ‘Cité Industrielle’ envisaged 
a utopian form of living for 35,000 inhabitants. It was 
premised on the abolition of private property and the 
idea that all the land would be a continuous, parklike green space, available to all. Garnier’s industrial 
city was designed for an area in southeast France, 
situated on a plateau with high land and a lake to the 
north, and a valley and a river to the south. 
The proposed source of the city’s power was a hydro-electric power station and dam. To the southeast of the dam, above the city and sheltered by the 
mountains, Garnier situated a hospital. Between the 
hospital and the city, he placed a park, and to the 
northwest of the city a cemetery. All these major zones were separated from each other by green areas. 
The city proper was to consist of two parts: a public and a residential area. The residential area was 
made up of rectangular blocks running east-west, 
which gave the city its characteristic elongated form. 
The basic housing units in Garnier’s plan were concrete single-family houses that (in line with ideas of 
openness and collectivity) were open to the public 
green space on all sides to allow the free movement 
of citizens. In the public area of the city, buildings 
were grouped into three sections: administrative 
services and assembly halls, museum collections, 
and sports and spectacle facilities. The only elements of an actual city that were lacking in Garnier’s 
utopian proposal were religious structures, a jail, a 
police station, and a law court. Garnier believed in 
the basic goodness of man. So, when asked why his 
‘Cité Industrielle’ was missing these amenities, he is 
said to have replied that the new society, governed 
by socialist law, would suppress capitalism and, as 
a result, there would be no swindlers, robbers, or 
murderers. He assumed that the ideal qualities of 
fraternity, goodness, and love of work were a fundamental part of man’s behavior.
The Cooperative Model
In the early 1900s, in the absence of strong state 
intervention, housing cooperatives in several cities 
increasingly took it upon themselves to provide affordable and qualitative housing for the working 
classes. Housing cooperatives became so important in Zürich, that, today, 25% of Zürich’s housing 
stock is in the hands of cooperatives. This was, in 
part, due to the fact that, from 1907, Zürich housing 
cooperatives received financial support from the 
municipal government, and from 1918, the year that 
the Swiss Landesstreik (general strike) took place, 
the state also started giving subsidies for collective 
housing. At the same time (i.e., in the early twentieth 
century), Zürich’s tram network also grew rapidly, 
which not only diminished the need for a close connection between the domicile and the place of work, 
but which also ‘unlocked’ potential building grounds

## S. 4

3
2.02
on the city’s periphery. As a result, most early-twentieth century cooperative housing developments in 
Zürich were low-rise housing blocks at the edges of 
the city that promoted collective living in the green 
spaces. Such cooperative Siedlungen not only provided citizens with affordable housing, but also recalibrated the relationship between the individual 
and the collective.
The State Model
In Vienna, from the 1920s, the state became very active in providing good-quality (and affordable) housing for its workers. No longer the capital of a large 
international empire (the Austro–Hungarian Empire), 
as a result of the First World War, Vienna and its surroundings, with a population of about two million, in 
1919 became a state within the new small country 
of Austria. Its elected municipal government was 
a Social Democratic one. This government sought 
to create a new Wohnkultur (culture of living) that 
would increase working class solidarity in the urban 
environment, and at the same time better provide for 
basic needs. To do so, the city, which in 1923 came 
under the leadership of mayor Karl Seitz, launched 
a Gemeindebauten housing program. This became 
one of the strongest (and most visible) manifestations of what is called ‘Red Vienna’—or socialist Vienna. In 1924, construction of Gemeindebauten simultaneously began on more than forty sites throughout 
the city. Construction costs were financed by high 
taxes on the wealthy so that rents could be set at no 
more than a small percentage of the typical income 
of a semi-skilled worker. Most of these new projects 
were located in relatively dense urban areas. Rather 
than small, single dwellings, they were conceived as 
massive complexes, covering at least one, and often 
several, city blocks. These so-called ‘superblocks’ 
not only provided housing and collective services, 
but also articulated new public spaces. Each complex was conceived as a ‘commune’ organized 
around public inner courtyards with play areas, kindergartens, clinics, libraries, laundry facilities, and 
theaters. Every project was different, and each devised a site-specific solution to reconcile new building with the existing, surrounding city fabric. The 
most famous example of these Gemeindebauten is 
the Karl-Marx-Hof by architect Karl Ehn, which was 
constructed between 1926 and 1930. More than one 
kilometer long, it was the single largest building in 
Red Vienna when completed, and housed a population of 5,000 people in 1,400 apartments.

## S. 5

4
2.02
Housing and the Industrial City: 
Geographies of Industrialization
1.Maps of selected cities which are discussed in this lecture
2.The growth of industry and Railways 1830-1914
3. Industry in Britain 1850
4. Industrial development 1890
1
2

## S. 6

5
2.02
Housing and the Industrial City: 
Geographies of Industrialization
3
4

## S. 7

6
2.02
Speculative Housing for Workers:
The Pragmatic Housing of Mumbai’s Chawls
5
6
5. India, Railways and Agriculture 1850 – 1925. The rapid growth of India‘s railway
network was an important factor in the transition from subsistence farming to
commercial agriculture which caused urban growth in main trade centres such as Bombay 
(Mumbai). 
6. Map of the city of Bombay, modern Mumbai, ca 1914, incl. two inserted smaller maps, one 
depicting the neighbourhood around the Fort, the other depicting the whole area around the 
Bay of Bombay/ source: 
Baedeker, Karl: Indien. Handbuch für Reisende. Verlag Karl Baedeker, Leipzig, 1914

## S. 8

7
2.02
Speculative Housing for Workers:
The Pragmatic Housing of Mumbai’s Chawls
8
9
7
7.Reclamation & Infrastructural Evolution of the Island City, 1864.
8. Eastern Docklands Development, 
1897-1915.
9. The Cotton Yards, Bombay, a wood 
engraving from ‚The Earth and its Inhabitants‘ by Elisee Reclus, 1883.

## S. 9

8
2.02
NTC Mills (National Textile Corporation)
Private Mills
MSTC Mills (Metal Scrap Trade Corporation)
10
11
Speculative Housing for Workers:
The Pragmatic Housing of Mumbai’s Chawls

## S. 10

9
2.02
13
12
10. Mumbai, Girangoan, also known as the ‘Village of Mills’.
11. Bathia Chawl, Mumbai. The location of the Chawl in the centre of the popular 
district of Bhuleswar. The typical building typology of the Chawl as two parallel 
housing blocks located around a central courtyard space. At the upper levels the 
corridor wraps around the courtyard providing access to the houses and connecting to the main stair.
12.+13. Bathia Chawl, Mumbai. The various dwelling typologies and their location 
within the larger volume of the Chawl.
14. Bathia Chawl, Mumbai. View from the main street with on the ground level the 
shops.
15.+16. Bathia Chawl, Mumbai. Views into courtyard.
Speculative Housing for Workers:
The Pragmatic Housing of Mumbai’s Chawls

## S. 11

10
2.02
14
15
16
Speculative Housing for Workers:
The Pragmatic Housing of Mumbai’s Chawls

## S. 12

11
2.02
Speculative Housing for Workers:
Housing the Working Classes in New York City’s Tenements
17
18
19
17. Industrial map of NYC’s Manufacturing Industries, 1922
18. ‘Five-cent-a-spot’ lodging in NYC, 1889
19. Clothing sweatshops in downtown Manhattan, 1889-1890

## S. 13

12
2.02
20
21
22
Speculative Housing for Workers:
Housing the Working Classes in New York City’s Tenements

## S. 14

13
2.02
23
24
25
20. Commissioners Plan of New York City, 1811
21. ‘Dens of Death’ on Mulberry Bend (1872)
22. Bird’s Eye View of East Side Tenement Block
23. Jacob Riis (1849-1914)
24. ‘How the Other Half Lives’ by Jacob Riis, 1890
25. Panel from the Tenement House Exhibition, 1900
Speculative Housing for Workers:
Housing the Working Classes in New York City’s Tenements

## S. 15

14
2.02
Pre-regulation
(1830s -1879)
"Old Law"
(1879 -1901)
"New Law"
(1901 -1929)
0
2
4
20m
6
8
10
26
27
26. The Tenement House Committee Maps
27. New York Tenement House Act, 1901
Speculative Housing for Workers:
Housing the Working Classes in New York City’s Tenements

## S. 16

15
2.02
Speculative Housing for Workers:
The New Urban Type of the Blockrand in Zürich
28
30
31
29
28. Zürich, Machine Factory of Esccher 
Wyss & Co, 1907.
29. Zürich, map with historical development. Source: KÜNZLE, DANIEL. City, 
Millionenvorstadt Und Arbeiterquartier 
Demographische Und Baulich-Soziale Entwicklung in Zürich 1830-1914. 
Stämpfli + Cie AG, 1991
30. General plan Zürich, ca. 1850.
31. General plan Zürich, 1913

## S. 17

16
2.02
Speculative Housing for Workers:
The New Urban Type of the Blockrand in Zürich
32
34
35
33
36
32. Zürich, map of 1892 with indication 
of Blockrand areas and Baumeisterhausern.
33. Zürich, The workers neighborhood of 
Aussersihl, 1925.
34. Zürich, demographic development 
of the centre and the external neighborhoods that were annexed.
35. Zürich, map of closed and open urban environments.
36. Zürich, aerial view of the urban extensions to the west with rail tracks, industry 
areas and neighborhoods with speculative blockrand buildings.

## S. 18

17
2.02
Visionary Towns for Companies and Industry:
Port Sunlight, a Green Company Town
37
38
39
37. Port Sunlight, map of Lower Bebington with in the right bottom corner the factory and site of Port Sunlight, 1913.
38. Port Sunlight, publicity poster for factory and workers village 
with in the front the railroad and in the back the river.
39. Port Sunlight, Aerial view of the factory and the newly planned town, along the Mersey river and close to the city of Liverpool.

## S. 19

18
2.02
40
41
42
44
45
43
40. Port Sunlight, marshy site with three streams, 1889. 
41. Port Sunlight, urban pattern that respects the flooded 
areas of the site, by architects William Owen and Segar 
Owen, 1889. 
42. A terrace of eight houses by Grayson and Ould of 
1896. The rich terracotta decoration is inspired by Continental late-Gothic buildings
43.+ 34. Port Sunlight, Collective dwellings for workers by 
JJ. Talbot, ca 1900.
44. + 45. Some of the earliest cottages on Park Road, by 
William Owen.
Visionary Towns for Companies and Industry:
Port Sunlight, a Green Company Town

## S. 20

19
2.02
46
47
48
46. Port Sunlight, Second urban plan with central boulevard and 
public buildings, by architects William Owen and Segar Owen, 
1914. 
47. Port Sunlight, Plan for the central boulevard with public library 
and museum b E. Prestwich, ca. 1913.
48. Port Sunlight, Plan for the central boulevard with public library 
and museum b E. Prestwich, ca. 1913.
Visionary Towns for Companies and Industry:
Port Sunlight, a Green Company Town

## S. 21

20
2.02
Visionary Towns for Companies and Industry:
Tony Garnier’s Cité Industrielle
49
50
51
52

## S. 22

21
2.02
Visionary Towns for Companies and Industry:
Tony Garnier’s Cité Industrielle
53
55
54
49. Tony Garnier, 1869 -1948 .
50. Cité Industrielle, Tony Garnier Schematic plan.
51. Cité Industrielle, Tony Garnier, Plan 1901-1904.
52. Cité Industrielle, Tony Garnier, View of urban landscape, 1904-1917.
53. Cité Industrielle, Tony Garnier, city centre, view, 1917.
54. Cité Industrielle, Tony Garnier, assembly rooms, portico, 1917.
55. Cité Industrielle, Tony Garnier, residential quarters, typical allotment plan 1917.

## S. 23

22
2.02
56
57
58
59
60
Visionary Towns for Companies and Industry:
Tony Garnier’s Cité Industrielle

## S. 24

23
2.02
61
62
63
56.+ 57. Cité Industrielle, Tony Garnier, plans of a typical houses, 1917.
58. Cité Industrielle, Tony Garnier, view of residential quarters with rights of passage and without 
fences or walls, 1917.
59. Cité Industrielle, Tony Garnier, view of larger boulevard, 1917.
60. Cité Industrielle, Tony Garnier, view of residential quarters with different housing typologies 
and with rights of passage, but without fences or walls, 1917.
61.-63. Cité Industrielle, Tony Garnier, plans, sections and view of apartment houses, 1917.
Visionary Towns for Companies and Industry:
Tony Garnier’s Cité Industrielle

## S. 25

24
2.02
64
66
65
67
Visionary Towns for Companies and Industry:
Tony Garnier’s Cité Industrielle

## S. 26

25
2.02
68
69
64.+65. Cité Industrielle, School and kindergarten, Tony Garnier, sc, 1917.
66.+67. Cité Industrielle, Tony Garnier, Hospital with its pavilion structure,1917.
68.+69. Cité Industrielle, Tony Garnier, Public baths, 1917.
70.+71. Cité Industrielle, Tony Garnier, Station quarter and main view of station 
with its tower, 1917.
72. Cité Industrielle, Tony Garnier, Dam, 1917.
73. Cité Industrielle, Tony Garnier, Factory with its docks, 1917.
Visionary Towns for Companies and Industry:
Tony Garnier’s Cité Industrielle

## S. 27

26
2.02
70
72
71
73
Visionary Towns for Companies and Industry:
Tony Garnier’s Cité Industrielle

## S. 28

27
2.02
The Cooperative Model:
Gross-Zürich and its Housing Cooperatives
74
75
76
74. Development of the housing market in Zürich between 1896 and 1910
75. Poster for the Social-democratic politician Emil 
Klötz, who was on the Zurich City Council from 1907 
(and became Stadtpräsident in 1928) 
76. Cartoon, ‘Das neue Verhältnis zwischen Arbeiter 
und Unternehmer’, 1896

## S. 29

28
2.02
77
78
The Cooperative Model:
Gross-Zürich and its Housing Cooperatives

## S. 30

29
2.02
Property of City
Property of Cooperatives
79
80
81
77. Entry by Albert Bodmer and Konrad Hippenmeier for 
the urban design competition ‘Groß Zurich’, 1918 (won 
2nd prize)
78. Principle underlying the entry by Hermann Herter for 
the urban design competition ‚Groß Zurich‘, 1918 (won 
2nd prize)
79. Zurich tramlines, 1912
80. Graph showing the housing built by cooperatives and 
the city of Zurich between 1893 (when the first cooperative 
housing settlement was built) and 2013
81. Overview of the 40,000 houses built by housing cooperatives that exist in Zurich today
The Cooperative Model:
Gross-Zürich and its Housing Cooperatives

## S. 31

30
2.02
82
83a
83b
82.- 83b Wohnsiedlung Nordstrasse, Schindelhäuser, Pfleghard & Haefeli, 1918-1920
84.- 86. Familienheim-Genossenschaft Friesenberg, Fritz Reiber, 1925
The Cooperative Model:
Gross-Zürich and its Housing Cooperatives

## S. 32

31
2.02
84
85
86
The Cooperative Model:
Gross-Zürich and its Housing Cooperatives

## S. 33

32
2.02
0
100
200
400m
87
88
89
90
The Cooperative Model:
Brussel‘s Garden Cities
87.+88. Le Logis and Floréal, Louis Van der Swaelmen and Jean-Jules Eggericx,
Brussels, 1921-1922
89.+90. La Cité Moderne, Victor Bourgeois, Brussels, 1922-1925

## S. 34

33
2.02
The State Model:
Red Vienna’s Superblocks
91
92
93

## S. 35

34
2.02
The State Model:
Red Vienna’s Superblocks
94
95
96
91. Map showing new building (light grey area) in Vienna between 1857 and 1905
92. Pawlatschen house, Vienna, ca. 1900
93. Tenement Plan, Vienna, ca. 1900
94. Kleingarten und Siedlungszone Vienna, 1921
95. Cooperative settlement movement
96.+97. Comparison Gennossenschaftsiedlung Hoffingergasse and Gemeindesiedlung 
Hermeswiese
97

## S. 36

35
2.02
99
98.‘Der Rote Mann Spricht’, 1927
99. Graph comparing number of housing units provided in 
Gemeindebauten vis-à-vis Siedlungen, between 1919 and 
1926.
100. Rabenhof, Schmid and Aichinger, 1925-1928
101.+102. Rabenhof, Schmid and Aichinger, 1925-1928 / 
Rabengasse
98
The State Model:
Red Vienna’s Superblocks

## S. 37

36
2.02
100
101
102
The State Model:
Red Vienna’s Superblocks

## S. 38

37
2.02
103
104
105
103.+104 Karl-Marx-Hof, site plan by 
Karl Ehn, 1926
105. Karl-Marx-Hof by Karl Ehn, aerial 
view
The State Model:
Red Vienna’s Superblocks

## S. 39

38
2.02
Further reading:
Avermaete, Tom, and Janina Gosseye. Urban Design 
in the 20th Century : a History. Zürich: gta Verlag, 2021. 
Chapter 1: Housing and the Industrial City.
Blau, Eve. The Architecture of Red Vienna: 1919-1934. 
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1998
Kurz, Daniel. Die Disziplinierung Der Stadt: Moderner 
Städtebau in Zürich 1900 Bis 1940. Erscheinungsort 
nicht ermittelbar: , 2008
Padora, Sameep, Maitri Dore, and Mythili Shetty. In the 
Name of Housing: A Study of 11 Projects in Mumbai. , 
2016
Stadtzunft, Zürich S. Zürich - Aufbruch Einer Stadt: 
Vom 19. Jahrhundert in Die Moderne. , 2017
Wiebenson, Dora, and Tony Garnier. Tony Garnier: the 
Cite Industrielle. London: Studio Vista, 1969
Sources Images:
Blau, Eve. The Architecture of Red Vienna: 1919-1934. 
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1998
Kurz, Daniel. Die Disziplinierung Der Stadt: Moderner 
Städtebau in Zürich 1900 Bis 1940. Erscheinungsort 
nicht ermittelbar: , 2008
Padora, Sameep, Maitri Dore, and Mythili Shetty. In the 
Name of Housing: A Study of 11 Projects in Mumbai. , 
2016
Philip‘s Atlas of World History. London: Chancellor 
Press, 1999.
Stadtzunft, Zürich S. Zürich - Aufbruch Einer Stadt: 
Vom 19. Jahrhundert in Die Moderne. , 2017
Wiebenson, Dora, and Tony Garnier. Tony Garnier: the 
Cite Industrielle. London: Studio Vista, 1969
Dates and Facts
Railway line opened between Zurich and Baden 
1847
Civil War in U.S 
 
 
 
 
1865
Opening Suez Canal 
 
 
 
 
1869
Port Sunlight 
 
 
 
 
 
1889
Cité Industrielle 
 
 
 
 
1899
New York Tenement Housing Act 
 
 
1901
Urban Plan (Bebauungsplan) Zurich 
 
 
1903
Zürich Städtebau Exhibition 
 
 
 
1911
Competition Gross Zürich 
 
 
 
1918
Subsidence for Cooperative Housing 
 
 
1918
Municipal Five Year Plan, Vienna 
 
 
1923
Rabenhof, Vienna 
 
 
 
 
1928
Karl-Marx Hof, Vienna 
 
 
 
1930
