---
titel: "B2.07-SCRIPT"
quelle: "Studium Andrin (HSLU/ETH)"
datei: "B2.07-SCRIPT.pdf"
seiten: 33
ocr-seiten: 0
tags: [bauwissen, vorlesung]
---

# B2.07-SCRIPT

## S. 2

1
2.07
Rethinking Masterplanning 
Following the Second World War, state-led urban 
planning resulted in the development of new 
neighborhoods and cities that offered better living 
conditions for citizens. However, from the mid-1950s 
the top-down nature of these planning ventures, as 
well as the anonymous character of the resulting 
urban environments, became the subject of severe 
criticism. Initiated by social scientists, such critiques 
were quickly echoed by writers, commentators, and 
politicians. Architects and urban designers were also 
concerned, and started to investigate alternatives 
to masterplanning, in which the social and cultural 
practices of inhabitants would be brought more into 
focus. Though these new approaches were critical of 
state-led planning, they were also—paradoxically—
often developed within the context of the welfare 
state. 
Streets in the Air
Team 10 played an important role in this redefinition 
of urban design in the late 1950s and early 1960s. 
This loose group of architects, which consisted, 
among others, of Alison and Peter Smithson (UK), 
Georges Candilis and Shadrach Woods (France), 
and Aldo van Eyck and Jaap Bakema (The 
Netherlands), created a moment of upheaval at the 
9th CIAM meeting in Aix-en-Provence (France). They 
suggested a new approach to urban design centered 
on the public and private practices of people. This 
caused great discontent within CIAM, especially 
with the older generation of Le Corbusier and Walter 
Gropius, and eventually led to the dissolution of the 
Congres Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne in 
1959.
The Golden Lane Housing Estate (1953) by the 
English architects Alison and Peter Smithson sought 
to revise the concept of the isolated housing slab as 
a main entity of modern urban design. This project 
for a bomb-damaged site in a London neighborhood 
proposed a new urban morphology: a network of 
elongated housing blocks that were connected by 
so-called ‘streets in the air’, and were superimposed 
to the existing urban condition as a new urban 
layer to the city of London. The Smithsons believed 
that this network would not only insert a new urban 
pattern, but also introduce a new pattern of public 
spaces. This new approach would be realized in 
the design for the housing estate of the Robin Hood 
Gardens (1966–72) in London. In their project for 
the Economist Building (1959–64) in London, the 
Smithsons also explored if the modern tower block, 
which was normally a freestanding building typology, 
could be acculturated to the dense morphology of 
the historical city center. Through specific attention 
to materiality and an innovative approach to the form 
of the city, the Smithsons reinvented the urban block 
to incorporate tower blocks and public spaces.
Configurative Model
The Orphanage (1960) in Amsterdam by the Dutch 
architect Aldo van Eyck offered a small study into 
an alternative to the anonymity of large-scale 
urban planning. The project was commissioned 
as an orphanage for children of all ages, and 
includes sleeping quarters, kitchen, laundry room, 
gymnasium, library, and administrative spaces. 
Van Eyck maintained that “a house must be like a 
small city if it’s to be a real house, a city like a large 
house if it’s to be a real city” in his essay “Steps 
Toward a Configurative Discipline” (1962). The 
Orphanage is composed of two sizes of modules: 
a smaller size for the residences, and a larger size 
for community spaces. It was conceived as a small 
city with decentral urban nodes and many points of 
interaction. The general urban layout is based on 
an orthogonal grid. The living units are arranged 
along two diagonal paths so that each unit has 
multiple exterior façades. Each individual living unit 
is connected through threshold elements with its 
own outdoor space, while a larger courtyard gives 
the center of the project the character of a town 
square. The entrance and administrative spaces 
mediate between the street, the large courtyard, 
and the residential units. Van Eyck was interested 
in the non-hierarchical development of cities, and in

## S. 3

2
2.07
Werf, the architect, determined the overall layout of 
the urban design (around four shared courtyards), 
the height of the complex, the different shapes 
and sizes of units, etc.—basically what needed to 
be decided for a contractor to start construction—
certain elements were left undecided. These mainly 
had to do with the internal layout of the units. Once 
construction on the overall complex had started, 
van der Werf organized two private consultation 
sessions with each of the future inhabitants of the 
complex, during which they discussed the spaces 
and functions that were needed in relation to the 
ages, hobbies, and preferences of each family 
member. On the basis of these conversations, 
alterations were made in the plan and façade of the 
resident’s housing unit.
Clusters and Growth
Another example of an alternative, bottom-up urban 
design project is the ‘Previ Lima’ competition that 
was organized in 1968 by the Government of Peru in 
collaboration with the United Nations Development 
program. This competition sought to develop new 
methods and techniques for housing that could 
easily be applied on a larger scale. The competition 
brief called for the design and construction of a 
community of low-cost dwellings for 1,500 families 
on a 40-hectare site. The brief did not, however, call 
for an overall masterplan for this site, but suggested 
a model of incremental growth, which relied on the 
house as the basic unit. Architects participating 
in the competition, the design brief stated, should 
design a dwelling 1–2 stories high that was 
(structurally) capable of carrying a third floor. The 
house was to be designed in such a way that it 
could be built efficiently and economically, and 
(importantly!) that the residents themselves could 
easily expand the dwelling without impinging on the 
overall quality of the urban design (public space). 
Construction technology was thus to be developed 
around the concept of the growing house. Apart 
from local, Peruvian architects, an international cast 
of celebrated architects also participated in the Previ 
The Orphanage he created a building with many inbetween conditions to break down the hierarchy of 
spaces.
Stem and Web
Georges Candilis, Alexis Josic, and Shadrach 
Woods often worked within the context of European 
welfare states. Their partnership developed two new 
concepts for urban design. With the ‘stem’ they tried 
to define an alternative to the street as a main formal 
and social figure of urban design. The concept of 
the ‘web’ was an attempt to rethink the role and 
temporalities of a basic urban grid. With their projects 
for Frankfurt Römerberg (1963), and the commission 
for the Free University of Berlin (1963), Candilis-
Josic-Woods illustrated how this could become the 
basis for designing an urban environment that would 
be constantly altered by its users. 
In Frankfurt-Römerberg (1963), a site set squarely 
between the Dom (cathedral), Römer (town hall), 
and Old St Nicholas Church, Candilis-Josic-Woods’ 
project proposed a web of cultural facilities and 
shopping concourses able to meet the demands of 
a new consumer society stepping from the shadows 
of a dark past. It comprised three terraced decks 
containing offices, markets, restaurants, workshops, 
art studios, galleries, auditoria, libraries, a youth 
center and music school, a cinema, a cabaret, 
an extension to the Historischen Museum, and 
dwellings. Two underground levels of parking 
and delivery roads allowed the complex to run 
autonomously. Approximating the dense fabric of 
European towns, the layout—with multiple pedestrian 
routes leading to interior courtyards, roof terraces, 
and the city beyond—could, the architects claimed, 
“re-establish the human scale and the relationship 
with the monuments”.
The Free University (1963) in the suburban Dahlem 
neighborhood of Berlin is also based on the concept 
of the web by Candilis-Josic-Woods. The urban 
design of the project starts from the superimposition 
of a layer of tracés and a layer of espaces ouverts. 
Interior streets, squares, and bridges are interlaced 
with gallery spaces, outdoor patios, terraces, 
and ramps. A primary weave of infrastructural 
elements is the result. In between the threads of 
this primary fabric, a large variety of architectural 
and programmatic entities can, as it were, be 
woven. Based on prefabricated elements, the 
auditoria, offices, laboratories, and seminar rooms 
of the university are nestled among the primary 
infrastructural threads. The ensuing product is a 
dense, two-dimensional patch of urban fabric that 
stands midway between an architectural building 
and an urban project.
Supports and Infill
In 1961, the Dutch architect John Habraken 
published De Dragers en de Mensen: Het Einde 
van de Massawoningbouw. This book presented 
a radical alternative to the construction of mass 
housing. It introduced a distinction between the 
‘support’ (de dragers) and the ‘infill’ (de mensen). 
The ‘supports’, Habraken explained, are the 
collective spaces of an urban development, such 
as the entrances, the corridors, the stairwells, 
spaces for meetings, etc. These, he contended, 
are the architect’s responsibility. The residents (de 
mensen), then, are responsible for (or have a say 
in) defining the ‘infill’: the private components of the 
complex. A good example of Habraken’s thinking 
about ‘supports’ and ‘infill’ is the Molenvliet housing 
project in Papendrecht (The Netherlands), which was 
designed by Frans van der Werf in the early 1970s, 
with the support of the SAR (Stichting Architecten 
Research). This complex consisted of 123 housing 
units in 67 different layouts, which were structured 
around four communal courtyards. Although van der

## S. 4

3
2.07
Lima competition, including James Stirling (UK) and 
Christopher Alexander (US). The house that Stirling 
proposed as the basic element to be built (by a 
contractor) was an L–shaped house, which was just 
one story high, and could accommodate up to four 
people. In a subsequent stage, it was anticipated that 
the family would complete the “square of this house” 
to accommodate up to 8 people on the ground floor 
level, all organized around a central courtyard. The 
expansion of this house subsequently extended to 
the first floor, either as a separate dwelling, or for 
an extended family. This concept of incremental 
growth, in which great autonomy and independence 
was given to the building occupant, was envisaged 
to create a very varied (and lively) neighborhood
Metabolism
Other design strategies that sought to counteract 
the perceived failures of modernist master-planning 
also emerged. In Japan, a new urban planning 
concept called ‘metabolism’ was popular in the early 
1960s. It fused ideas about urban megastructures 
with those of organic biological growth, hence the 
term ‘metabolism’. Japanese Metabolists rejected 
the modernist notion of the city as a finite object 
that could be ‘masterplanned’, and viewed it, 
instead, as an organic process. They considered 
the development of human society as an ongoing 
biological process, and believed that traditional 
‘masterplans’, which aimed to provide cities with a 
final, stable state, were incapable of accommodating 
the growth of the modern city. Metabolists proposed 
a different attitude to urban design: one that did 
not envision a final physical destination, but rather 
proposed an understanding of the city as a dynamic 
project of constant transformation. One of the most 
emblematic ‘Metabolist’ projects is Kenzo Tange’s 
1960 plan for Tokyo Bay. This ‘Tokyo Bay Scheme’ 
sought to impose a new physical order on the city 
of Tokyo, which would accommodate the city’s 
continued expansion and guarantee continual 
internal regeneration. This design proposed a 
linear infrastructure that would straddle Tokyo 
Bay, spanning a distance of nearly 30 kilometers. 
It consisted of a series of interlocking loops, which 
promised infinite growth.
The ideas of the Metabolists penetrated the far 
corners of the globe, and led to more ‘paper’ 
projects—i.e., projects that were never realized, 
such as Tange’s Tokyo Bay scheme. Nonetheless, 
many notable built examples exist as well. ‘Habitat 
67’ by Moshe Safdie is one such example. 
Constructed for the world expo that was held in 
Montreal (Canada) in 1967, Safdie’s building relied 
on a stackable system of prefabricated units, which 
were strong enough not to break when lifted into 
place. ‘Habitat 67’ proposed a new model of urban 
development: a system of space organization that 
promised unlimited growth, based on the threedimensional networking of standardized elements, 
and was able to harmoniously nest all the functions 
in varying, complex, and evolving patterns.
Urban Megastructures
In parallel to these Metabolist experiments, the 
concept of the urban megastructure emerged. Some 
of these megastructures did not explicitly convey 
the promise of endless growth and adaptability, 
but rather solidified into a finite form. The Byker 
Wall (Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) by Ralph Erskine 
is such an example. However, it is not an example 
of top-down masterplanning. Destined to replace 
an existing Victorian working-class area of densely 
built terraces considered unfit for human habitation, 
the Byker project consciously and explicitly involved 
local residents in its design process and sought to 
break up the monotony that had become associated 
with neighborhoods due to state-led urban planning. 
Erskine was specifically chosen for this task because 
he was known for both his humane approach 
and concern for how buildings related physically 
and socially to their setting. The plan that Erskine 
designed was informed by an extensive process of 
public consultation, which followed several distinct 
strategies. First, a pilot scheme was set up involving 
46 households working with architects in the design 
of their future homes. Erskine also set up his offices 
on site, in the middle of redevelopment, so existing 
residents could easily drop in to ask questions and 
raise concerns. Finally, Erskine proposed that the 
demolition of the existing houses should proceed 
apace with the construction of the new houses, so 
residents would not have to move off site.

## S. 5

4
2.07
1
2
1. Alison and Peter Smithson,Urban Re-identification Grid- CIAM IX, Aix-en-Provence, France, 1953 .
2. Golden Lane Housing, London, 1953, by Alison and Peter Smithson.
Revised Typologies for the City
Alison and Peter Smithson: Reconceiving the Modern Typologies of Slab and Tower Block

## S. 6

5
2.07
3
4
3.-4.Golden Lane Housing, London, 1953, by Alison and Peter Smithson.
Revised Typologies for the City
Alison and Peter Smithson: Reconceiving the Modern Typologies of Slab and Tower Block

## S. 7

6
2.07
Revised Typologies for the City
Alison and Peter Smithson: Reconceiving the Modern Typologies of Slab and Tower Block
5
6
7
8
5. London, The Economist Building, 1959-64 by Alison and 
Peter Smithson 
6. London, The Economist Building, in urban plan 1959-64 by 
Alison and Peter Smithson 
7. London, The Economist Building, 1959-64 by Alison and 
Peter Smithson 
8. London, The Economist Building plaza, 1959-64 by Alison 
and Peter Smithson

## S. 8

7
2.07
Revised Typologies for the City
Alison and Peter Smithson: Reconceiving the Modern Typologies of Slab and Tower Block
9
10
9. London, The Economist Building, Collage in urban setting, 
1959-64 by Alison and Peter Smithson 
10. London, The Economist Building, 1959-64 by Alison and 
Peter Smithson

## S. 9

8
2.07
Towards a Configurative Urban Discipline
Aldo van Eyck: The City as House and the House as City
11
12
13
11. Aldo Van Eyck, Otterlo Circles, CIAM XI, Otterlo, The Netherlands, 1959
12. Amsterdam, Municipal Orphanage, by Aldo Van Eyck, 1955-1960.
13. Amsterdam, Municipal Orphanage, unit for juniors, by Aldo Van Eyck, 1955-1960.
14. Amsterdam, Municipal Orphanage ground floor plan, by Aldo Van Eyck, 1955-1960.
15. -16. Amsterdam, Municipal Orphanage, treshold space, by Aldo Van Eyck, 1955-1960.

## S. 10

9
2.07
Towards a Configurative Urban Discipline
Aldo van Eyck: The City as House and the House as City
14
15
16

## S. 11

10
2.07
The Public Space of Stem and Web
Candilis-Josic-Woods: Stem and Web as alternatives for urban design
17
18
17. Candilis-Josic-Woods, Collage of Stem concept
18. Candilis-Josic-Woods, Sketch of Stem concept

## S. 12

11
2.07
The Public Space of Stem and Web
Candilis-Josic-Woods: Stem and Web as alternatives for urban design
19
20
19. Frankfurt Römerberg, Reconstruction plan, Candilis-Josic-Woods, 1963.
20. Frankfurt Römerberg, Web structure, Candilis-Josic-Woods, 1963.

## S. 13

12
2.07
The Public Space of Stem and Web
Candilis-Josic-Woods: Stem and Web as alternatives for urban design
21
22
21. Frankfurt Römerberg, Section of web, Candilis-Josic-Woods, 1963.
22. Frankfurt Römerberg, Reconstruction plan, Candilis-Josic-Woods, 1963.

## S. 14

13
2.07
The Public Space of Stem and Web
Candilis-Josic-Woods: Stem and Web as alternatives for urban design
23
24
25
23./24. Frankfurt Römerberg, Reconstruction plan, Candilis-Josic-Woods, 1963.
25. Frankfurt Römerberg, Reconstruction plan in esxitign setting, Candilis-Josic-Woods, 1963.

## S. 15

14
2.07
The Public Space of Stem and Web
Candilis-Josic-Woods: Stem and Web as alternatives for urban design
26
27
28

## S. 16

15
2.07
The Public Space of Stem and Web
Candilis-Josic-Woods: Stem and Web as alternatives for urban design
29
26. Berlin Free University, Collage Candilis-Josic-Woods, 1963.
27. Berlin Free University, Planes of Isolation, Candilis-Josic-Woods, 1963.
28. Berlin Free University, Structuring principles of the web, Candilis-Josic-Woods, 1963.
29. Berlin Free University, Prefabricated elements of raw construction, Candilis-Josic-Woods, 1963.

## S. 17

16
2.07
The Public Space of Stem and Web
Candilis-Josic-Woods: Stem and Web as alternatives for urban design
30
31
32
30. Berlin Free University, plan, Candilis-Josic-Woods, 1963.
31./32. Berlin Free University, Plan and sections, Candilis-Josic-Woods, 1963.

## S. 18

17
2.07
Agency in Housing: Between Supports and Infill
Netherlands / John Habraken and Stichting Architecten Research (SAR), The Netherlands
33. Habraken’s concept of ‘Open Building’ 
34.-36. Molenvliet housing project, Papendrecht (The Netherlands), Frans van der Werf, 1974
33
34
35
36

## S. 19

18
2.07
37.-38. Molenvliet housing project, Papendrecht (The Netherlands), Frans van der Werf, 1974
37
38
Agency in Housing: Between Supports and Infill
Netherlands / John Habraken and Stichting Architecten Research (SAR), The Netherlands

## S. 20

19
2.07
39
40 39./40. Molenvliet housing project, Papendrecht (The Netherlands), Frans van der 
Werf, 1974
Agency in Housing: Between Supports and Infill
Netherlands / John Habraken and Stichting Architecten Research (SAR), The Netherlands

## S. 21

20
2.07
Systems Thinking through Patterns and Clusters
Peru / The Concept of the ‚growing house‘ as the basic component of urban design:PREVI Lima Housing Competition
41
42
43
41. James Stirling’s for the Previ Lima, 1969: Unit growth diagram + detailed plans 
42./43. James Stirling’s for the Previ Lima, 1969: vertical extension + appropriation of the house 
44. Previ Lima, as built 
45. Overall site plan for Previ Lima by James Stirling, 1969
46./47. James Stirling’s for the Previ Lima, 1969: linking housing into a community cluster.

## S. 22

21
2.07
Systems Thinking through Patterns and Clusters
Peru / The Concept of the ‚growing house‘ as the basic component of urban design:PREVI Lima Housing Competition
44
45
46
47

## S. 23

22
2.07
Thinking the City as Metabolism
Kenzo Tange‘s Tokyo Bay Scheme
48
49
48. Kenzo Tange (1913-2005), Tokyo Bay Scheme, 1960 
49. Model of a plan for Tokyo Bay by Kenzo Tange, 1960
50. Sketches of the open ‘fishbone’ model of urban planning versus the closed radial/ring urban 
system / Diagram of the new civic axis straddling Tokyo Bay and its multi-level transportation 
system, 1960
51./52. Scale model of Tange’s Tokyo Bay scheme, showing the elevated highways

## S. 24

23
2.07
Thinking the City as Metabolism
Kenzo Tange‘s Tokyo Bay Scheme
50
51
52

## S. 25

24
2.07
53. New York, Lower Manhattan Expressway project, Paul Rudolph, 1970.
54./55. Boston, Harbour project, Dwelling structures, Kenzo Tange, 1959.
54
55
53
Thinking the City as Metabolism
Kenzo Tange‘s Tokyo Bay Scheme

## S. 26

25
2.07
56
57
56. Moshe Safdie (1938 - )
57. ‘Habitat 67’ by Moshe Safdie in Montréal, Canada
Megastructures between Human-Centred and Process-Driven Urban Design Approaches
Habitat 67‘ by Moshe Safdie

## S. 27

26
2.07
Megastructures between Human-Centred and Process-Driven Urban Design Approaches
Habitat 67‘ by Moshe Safdie
58
59
60
58./59. Details of the connection between the 
cells of ‘Habitat 67’ 
60. ‘Habitat 67’ by Moshe Safdie in Montréal, 
Canada, seen from downtown Montréal

## S. 28

27
2.07
61
62
61. Different apartment units in ‘Habitat 67’ 
62. ‘Habitat 67’ by Moshe Safdie, Montréal (Canada), 1967 
Megastructures between Human-Centred and Process-Driven Urban Design Approaches
Habitat 67‘ by Moshe Safdie

## S. 29

28
2.07
Megastructures between Human-Centred and Process-Driven Urban Design Approaches
Byker Housing by Ralph Erskine
63
64
63. Old terraced housing at Byker 
64. Site plan for Byker Housing, 1968-81

## S. 30

29
2.07
66
65
65. Byker wall by Ralph Erskine, Newcastle, 1968-81 
66. Northern side of the Byker Wall by Ralph Erskine, Newcastle, ca 1970s
Megastructures between Human-Centred and Process-Driven Urban Design Approaches
Byker Housing by Ralph Erskine

## S. 31

30
2.07
67
68
69
67. Southern side of the Byker Wall by Ralph Erskine, Newcastle, ca 1970s 
68./69. Plan and section of the Byker Wall by 
Ralph Erskine, Newcastle 
70.-72. Housing grouped around a courtyard at 
Kendal Street, Byker, Newcastle (UK), designed 
by Ralph Erkine 1968-81 
Megastructures between Human-Centred and Process-Driven Urban Design Approaches
Byker Housing by Ralph Erskine

## S. 32

31
2.07
70
71
72
Megastructures between Human-Centred and Process-Driven Urban Design Approaches
Byker Housing by Ralph Erskine

## S. 33

32
2.07
Further reading:
- 
Avermaete, Tom, and Janina Gosseye. Urban Design in the 20th Century : a History. Zürich: gta Verlag, 2021. Chapter 6: Rethinking Masterplanning
- 
Abrams, Robin. “Byker Revisited.” Built Environment 29:2 (2003): 117–131.
- 
Avermaete, Tom. Another Modern: The Post-War Architecture and Urbanism of Candilis-Josic-Woods. Rotterdam: NAi, 2005.
- 
Banham, Reyner. Megastructure: Urban Futures of the Recent Past. London: Thames & Hudson, 1976. 
- 
Beringer, Hubert. “Habitat 67: Architectures d’Images, Images d’Architectures.” JSSAC/JSÉAC, vol. 27, no. 1-2 (2002): 3-20.
- 
Lin, Zhongjie. “Urban Structure for the Expanding Metropolis: Kenzo Tange’s 1960 Plan for Tokyo.” Journal of Architectural and Planning Research 24:2 (2007): 
109–124. 
- 
Risselada, Max and Dirk van den Heuvel. Team 10: In Search of a Utopia of the Present 1953-81. Rotterdam: NAI publishers, 2005.
- 
Strauven, Francis and Aldo van Eyck. Aldo Van Eyck - the Shape of Relativity. Amsterdam: Architectura & Natura, 1998. 
Sources Images:
Gopnick, Blake, Michael Sorkin, Moshe Safdie, and 
Moshe Safdie & Associates. Moshe Safdie - Habitat 
‚67, Montreal: Con Un Intervento Di Moshe Safdie. 
Universale Di Architettura I Capolavori, Vol. 35. 
Torino: Testo & Immagine, 1998.
Collymore, Peter. Ralph Erskine. Barcelona: Editorial Gustavo Gili, 1983.
Kuan, Seng, Kenzo Tange, and Harvard University. 
Graduate School of Design. Kenzo Tange: Architecture for the World. Baden: Lars Müller, 2012.
Risselada, Max, and Dirk V. Heuvel. Team 10: In 
Search of a Utopia of the Present 1953-81. Rotterdam: NAI publishers, 2005.
Dates and Facts
1953: Emergence of Team 10 at CIAM 9 in Aix-en-Provence, France
1953: Golden Lane Housing Estate by Alison and Peter Smithson
1959: Economist Building by Alison and Peter Smithson
1960: Tokyo Bay scheme by Kenzo Tange
1960: Orphanage Amsterdam by Aldo van Eyck
1961: Dragers en Mensen: Het einde van de massawoningbouw by John Habraken
1962: Fort Lamy by Candilis-Josic-Woods
1963: Frankfurt Römerberg by Candilis-Josic-Woods
1963: Free University Berlin by Candilis-Josic-Woods
1966: Robin Hood Gardens by Alison and Peter Smithson
1967: Habitat 67 by Moshe Safdie
1968: Previ Lima competition
1968-81: Byker Wall by Ralph Erskine
